
===PAGE 1===

===PAGE 2===
 
 
Alfred J. Hendron, Jr. Joseph L. Ehasz Kermit Paul 
No. 4 College Park Court 11485 Upper Meadow Drive 15 Boies Ct. 
Savoy, IL  61874 Gold River, CA   95670 Pleasant Hill, CA 
94523 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taum Sauk Upper Dam Breach 
FERC No. P-2277 
 
 
Technical Reasons for the Breach 
 
of December 14, 2005 
 
 
by 
 
 
 FERC Independent Panel of Consultants (IPOC) 
 
 
 Taum Sauk Pumped Storage Project 
 
 
 
 
 
May 24, 2006
===PAGE 3===
3 
Taum Sauk Upper Dam Breach 
 
Technical Reasons for the Breach 
of December 14, 2005 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
 
1.1 General  
 
1.2 Appointment of Independent Panel of Consultants 
  
 1.3 Scope of Investigations 
 
2. Project Description 
 
3. Design, Construction History and Performance 
 
 
3.1 Design and Construction History 
  
 3.2 Panel Comments on Design 
 
 3.3 Embankment performance 
 
4. Standard Operating Procedure 
 
5. Overpumping Protective Systems 
 
5.1 Upper Reservoir Water Level Monitoring and Control System As                      
      Installed 
 
5.2 Emergency Water Level Protection Backup System As Installed 
 
5.3 Over Pumping Protection Response on December 14, 2005 
 
 5.3.1 Response of Water Level Monitoring and Control System 
 
 5.3.2 Response of Water Lev el Protection Backup System 
===PAGE 4===
4 
 
6. December 14, 2005 Breach 
 
6.1 General Descriptions and Observations 
 
6.2 Estimate of Peak Reservoir Elevation 
 
7. Technical Causes of Breach 
 
 7.1 Response of Overpumping Protec tive Systems on December 14, 2005 
 
7.2 Upper Reservoir Water Level Monitoring and Control System as                    
      Found 
 
 7.3 Emergency Water Level Protection Back-Up System as Found 
 
 7.4 Overtopping of Embankment Dam 
   
  7.4.1 Sensitivity of Taum Sauk Du mped Rockfill Dam to           
                              Overtopping 
 
  7.4.2 Effect of Stor ing Water on Parapet Wall 
 
  7.4.3 Foundation of Rockfill Dam 
  
 7.5 Possible Failure Modes 
 
  7.5.1 General 
  7.5.2 Discussion of Specific Modes of Failure 
  7.5.3 Comments 
 
 
8. Conclusions 
 
Appendix A   IPOC Information Request Letter 
 
Appendix B   Event Chronology 
 
Appendix C   Early Project Correspondence 
 
 
===PAGE 5===
5 
 
1. Introduction 
  
1.1  General 
   
The upper reservoir of the Taum Sauk Pumped Storage Project (shown full in 
Figure 1-1) was overtopped during the final pumping cycle the morning of 
December 14, 2005.  Overt opping of the 10 ft high pa rapet wall and subsequent 
failure of the rockfill embankment formed a breach about 720 feet wide at the top 
of the rockfill dam and 430 feet  at the base of the dam, as  shown in Figure 1-2.  
Reservoir data indicate that pumping stopped at 5:15 AM December 14, 2005 
with the initial breach formi ng at approximately the same  time. Breach widening 
formed quickly, and complete evacuation of the 4,350 acre-ft upper reservoir 
occurred within about 25 minutes.  The breac h flow passed into the East Fork of 
the Black River (the river upstream of  the lower Taum Sauk Dam) through a 
State park and campground area and into t he lower reservoir. Upon leaving the 
Lower Taum Sauk Dam Spil lway area, the high flow s proceeded downstream of 
the Black River to the town of Leste rville, MO, located about 3.5 miles 
downstream from the Lower Dam, see Figure 1-3. The incremental rise in the 
river level was about 2 feet which remained within the banks of the river. 
 
1.2  Appointment of Independent Panel of Consultants 
 
This Panel was convened by the FERC Director of Dam Safety to establish an 
independent assessment of th e technical causes of the release of the Upper 
Reservoir at Taum Sauk.  It is anticipated that the conclusions of this report will 
be applied in the review of other pum ped storage projects , which are without 
spillways on the upper reservoirs and which are within the jurisdiction of the 
FERC. 
 
Following the breach of the upper reservoir at the Ta um Sauk pumped storage 
project, the Federal Ener gy Regulatory Commission (FERC) established an 
Independent Panel of Consulta nts (IPOC).  The individual s on this Panel were 
contacted by the Director of Dam Safety , Mr. Constantine Tjoumas, during the 
week of December 26, 2005. 
 
The members of the Independent Panel of Consultants are: 
 
  Dr. Alfred J. Hendron, Jr., Geotechnical Engineer 
  Joseph L. Ehasz, Geotechnical Engineer 
  Kermit Paul, Mechanical & Electrical Engineer 
 
The Panel members accepted the assign ment of investigating the technical 
causes of this breach; the contract ual arrangements were made by the FERC 
Dam Safety office in Washington D.C. 
 
===PAGE 6===
6 
  
1.3  Scope of Investigations 
 
In the contractual scope of work for each Review Panel member it was specified 
that the Panel should: 
 
 
o Review the operational characteri stics of the project including 
the overpumping protective systems leading up to the breach of 
the upper reservoir 
 
o Perform a forensic evaluatio n of the breach of the upper 
reservoir dam to determine the specific failure mode 
 
 
o Submit a final report documenting the results of their forensic 
findings on the cause of the breach of the upper reservoir 
 
 
o Continue as a panel of experts to assist the FERC staff in 
reviewing the analysis, design and construction of the remedial 
measures needed to re-establish the upper reservoir 
 
 
 
In this report, the first three bullet ed items above are addressed in detail.  
Reviews of the design and construction of re-establishment of the upper reservoir 
will be treated in subsequent Panel Reports. 
 
Panel Member Hendron was requested by FERC to visit the Taum Sauk Project 
on December 14, 2005, before this Panel  was appointed.  The breach area and 
the remaining embankment was ins pected by Panel Member Hendron on 
December 15 with FERC staff from the Washington office and from the Chicago 
Regional Office.  Panel Members Ehasz and Paul visited the Taum Sauk site on 
December 28, 2005.  The P anel assembled an initial in formation request list of 
24 items on January 3, 2006 which was nec essary to further the Panel’s 
investigation.  This list was sent to  Mr. Tjoumas on January 6, 2006.  This 
correspondence is given in Appendix A.  The Panel received various items of 
information for review during January and  Panel Members Paul and Hendron 
visited the Taum Sauk Project again on January 30 as part of the First meeting of 
the AmerenUE Board of Consultants at the site and in St. Louis between January 
30 and February 1. 
 
As part of this investigation the Panel held interviews of AmerenUE staff and 
AmerenUE subcontractors at the project site and in St. Louis on February 8, 9, 
and 10.  Similar interviews of FERC Chic ago and Washington D.C. staff and the 
===PAGE 7===
7 
authors of the 2003 Part 12 Report were al so held in the Chicago Regional office 
on February 17th,   2006. 
 
The Panel participated in the AmerenUE Board of Consultants Second meeting 
in St. Louis on March 23 and 24.  On March 24, the Panel also received 
presentations concerning t he Taum Sauk site and breach from the Missouri 
DNR, Division of Dam Safety, and the Geological Survey.  The Rizzo forensic 
report for AmerenUE was received on  April 10, 2006 and the Finding 
Investigation conducted by FERC staff was received on April 25, 2006. 
 
In the remainder of this report, the Panel has described t he conditions which 
existed at the Upper Taum Sauk Reservoir prior to the reservoir release and we 
have given our conclusions on the most pr obable causes of the reservoir release 
at the breach location. 
 
2. Project Description 
 
The Taum Sauk Project is located in Reynolds County, Missouri, on the East 
Fork of the Black River approximately 90 m iles southwest of St. Louis, Missouri.  
The project is a reversible pumped storage project used to supplement the 
generation and transmission facilities of Am erenUE, and consists basically of a 
mountain ridge top upper reservoir, a shaf t and tunnel conduit, a 450-MW, two-
unit pump-turbine, generator-motor plant and a lower reservoir.  It was the first of 
the large capacity pumped-st orage stations to begin operation in the United 
States.  The Project was completed in  1962 and the first f illing of the Upper 
Reservoir began in July 1963.  The plant  went into commercial operation on 
December 20, 1963.  The operating head between the Upper and Lower 
Reservoir ranges from 776 ft to 860 ft. 
 
New pump/turbine runners were installe d in 1999 resulting in a maximum 
pumping flow of 3,000 cfs per unit compared to a design flow of 2,450 cfs per unit 
for the original runners. The upper reserv oir has a capacity of 4,350 acre-ft.  
There is no upper reservoir spillway.  
 
The Upper Dam is a continuous hillt op dike 6,562-ft long forming a kidney-
shaped reservoir as shown in Figure 1-1.  The dike is a concrete-faced dumped 
rockfill dam (CFRD) from the foundation level to elevation 1570.0 ft and a rolled 
rockfill between Elevations 1570 and 15 89.  The upstream  slope is 1.3:1 
(horizontal:vertical) and the downstream slope is at the natural angle of repose of 
the material, approximately 1.3:1, as show n in Figure 2-1. The crest is 12- feet 
wide.  A 10-feet high, 1-foot thick reinfo rced concrete parapet wall atop the fill 
extended the crest to elevation 1,599 feet, as originally constructed.  Since 1963, 
the settlements of the rockfill embankment at various points have varied between 
1 to 2 feet; the low point at the top of the parapet wall, as surveyed by AmerenUE 
on November 6, 2004 was elevation 1596.99 feet at Panel 72. 
   
===PAGE 8===
8 
 
Figure 2-1 Cross section from original design drawings 
 
 
The pneumatically placed upstream reinforced concrete face slab has a design 
thickness of 10 inches, and had joints (with copper waterstops) located at the 
junctures with the parapet wall, the f oundation cutoff-slab and with adjacent face 
panels.  The face slab was placed in p anels, 60 feet wide at their widest 
dimension.   
 
The project license was issued on August  26, 1965.  The licensee is AmerenUE 
with headquarters in St. Louis, MO.  Ta um Sauk is the only pumped storage 
facility in the AmerenUE syst em.  It is dispatched fr om the St. Louis control 
center based on economics and the need to meet requi rements of the Mid-West 
Independent System Operator  (MISO) and the Northeast Electric Reliability 
Council (NERC).   
 
AmerenUE’s St. Louis control center st aff provide generate mode and pump 
mode start, stop and generating Megawatt (MW) instru ctions to operators at 
Osage control center (Bagnell Dam).  In the pumping mode, input MW and pump 
cfs (cubic feet per second) discharge d epend on the head (elevation difference 
between the upper and lower reservoirs) and are not adjustabl e.  The Osage 
operators remotely start, stop and load t he Taum Sauk units as instructed.  
Protection circuits are provided at Taum  Sauk to prevent operating the units or 
reservoirs beyond established limits.   
 
Over-pumping protection of the upper re servoir consists of two separate 
systems, the water level monitoring and control system and the emergency level 
protection backup system.  These ove r-pumping protection systems were 
initiated into operation in November of 2004 in conjunction with the installation of 
a geomembrane liner to reduce reservoir l eakage.  As part of this “project 
improvement” the old reservoir contro l systems which were anchored to the 
concrete face prior to 2004 were replac ed by the new system in November of 
2004.  The new system was not anchored to the concrete face because it was 

===PAGE 9===
9 
decided that the new geomembrane liner  should not be penetrated by anchor 
bolt holes.  The HDPE pipe housing the pressure instruments was not positively 
anchored to the concrete face slab. 
 
3. Design, Construction History and Performance 
 
3.1 Design and Construction History 
 
The top of Proffit Mountain was level ed and the excavated rock was used to 
construct the dike that forms the upper reservoir.  The bedrock and thus the 
rockfill is predominantly a rhyolite porphyr y.  Little information is available 
concerning the as-built gr adation of materials used in  the construction.  As 
described in available engineering reports , the overburden was stripped for the 
upstream-most 70 feet, as shown in Figur e 2-1, and placed downstream to form 
the bed of the perimeter r oad.  All weathered material  was to be stripped from 
this area to sound rock.  Overburden varied  from a few feet to as much as 65-
feet thick.  Clay seams were also remo ved by excavating during construction.  
Excavated rock was end-dumped from trucks  and sluiced with 30-psi water, to 
form the ring dike.  A filter zone and se veral layers of compacted rock were 
placed over questionable areas where piping into the foundation might be 
possible.  Outside of t he 70-foot stripped zone, the weathered rock was left in-
place.  Low areas in the natural topogr aphy were also filled with compacted rock.  
It was reported in the 7
th Part 12D report that excavat ed fines were used to level 
the reservoir floor.   
 
The upstream slope is 1.3:1 (horizontal: vertical) and the downstream slope is at 
the natural angle of repose of the material, approximately 1.3:1. The 
pneumatically placed upstream concrete fa ce slab has a design thickness of 10 
inches, and is reinforced with No. 7 bars at 12 inches both ways.  In actual 
placement, the slab thickness averaged nearly 18 inches due to the unevenness 
of the rockfill.  The upstr eam concrete face had joints (with copper waterstops) 
located at the junctures with the parapet wall, the fo undation cutoff-slab and with 
adjacent face panels.  The face slab was placed in panels, 60 feet wide at their 
widest dimension.  Expansion joints  between the slabs to accommodate 
movement, caused by settlement of the rockfill, used ¾-in asphaltic expansion 
joint material and U-shaped copper water stops.  
 
A reinforced concrete plinth was provided at the toe of the concrete face.  Where 
the natural rock surface was substantially higher than the reservoir floor, the rock 
was excavated on a near vertical slope a nd the plinth was at  the top of the 
excavated rock.  In these areas, the ro ck cut between the reservoir floor and the 
plinth was sealed with a 4-inch layer of  wire mesh-reinforc ed shotcrete.  The 
entire reservoir bottom was sealed with tw o-2-inch layers of hot-mix asphalt 
concrete placed over leveled and com pacted quarry muck.  Around the edge of 
the asphaltic concrete, a single line grou t curtain was constructed to limit 
seepage under the dam. 
===PAGE 10===
10 
 
 
The ring dike forming the Upper Reserv oir was closed near panel 50, which is 
also an area of reportedly finer materials.  The dike is topped with a 12-foot layer 
of horizontally compacted rock placed in 4-foot lifts and compacted with a 
vibratory roller.  The parapet wall was cast -in-place on top of this top layer.  
Based on observation, it appears the crus hed rock varies from 1000 lb stone to 
predominately less than 20 lb stone.  T he stone is predominat ely angular.  The 
outer shell of the dike contains clean rock fill material with more sandy and 
pebble sized materials in the closure se ction. Settlement of the rockfill varied 
between 1 and 2 ft. with the lowest area at  Panel 72, where the top of the 
parapet wall was 1596.99 ft as dete rmined by an AmerenUE survey dated 
November 6, 2004. 
 
3.2 Panel Comments on Design 
 
The design and construction of the CFRD for the Taum Sauk Upper Reservoir 
Dam followed the pattern of older CFRD’ s constructed in California such as 
Strawberry Dam and Salt Springs Dams.  These dams were dumped rockfill 
CFRD’s with slopes ranging from 1.3:1 to  1.4:1.  Each of these dams have 
parapet walls for reflecting waves at no rmal maximum water storage level; but 
the maximum water storage levels are al ways about 1 to 2 ft below the crest of 
the rockfill.  But water levels could pos sibly encroach on the parapet walls in 
times of floods.  The design decision m ade for Taum Sauk Upper Reservoir Dam 
to routinely store water 6 to 8 ft hi gh on a 10 ft high parapet wall during daily 
operations made the Taum Sauk dumpe d rockfill CFRD “Unprecedented” as 
compared to the previous CFRD’s, as summarized by Cooke, 1988 (Figure 3-1).  
 
It is noted from Figure 3-1 that nearly 100% of the CFRD’s prior to 1963 were 
dumped and many had cracked face slabs and high leakage.  Because of this 
behavior there were no CFRD’s built be tween 1940 and 1950.  As shown on 
Figure 3-1 Taum Sauk was the last ne wly constructed dum ped rockfill CFRD in 
the USA; it is also shown in Figure 3- 1 that Cabin Creek CFRD was designed at 
about the same time, but was designed as a compacted ro ckfill CFRD.  Cabin 
Creek was compacted in 2 ft thick lifts to a height of 70 m (230 ft.) and was an 
Upper Reservoir Dam for a pumped storage project in Colorado.  The maximum 
section of Cabin Creek Dam is shown in Figure 3-2 which shows an upstream 
slope of 1.3:1 and a downstrea m compacted slope of 1.75: 1.  It is especially 
important to note that the maximum operating level is 6 ft below the rockfill crest 
of the dam, and 9 ft below the top of a 3 ft high parapet wall on the crest of the 
dam.  The differences in the Taum Sauk and Cabin Creek CFRD designs 
represent differences in risk toleranc es for different engineering firms and 
individual consultants during the same time frame taking into account the state of 
the art for CFRD design in the middle 1960’s.  It should also be noted that Cabin 
Creek Dam was overtopped by pumping, but did not fail. 
 
===PAGE 11===
11 
3.3 Embankment Performance  
 
As described above in Secti on 3.1, the embankment is a rockfill structure with a 
parapet wall and has experienced cons iderable deformation and settlement 
beginning with the first filli ng of the reservoir.  Fo r example, there were 
settlements in excess of one foot within t he first two years of  operation (1963 – 
1965).  These settlements continued, alth ough at a lower rate, until 1976, when 
they leveled somewhat, to as much as  1.6 feet of settlement along the NW 
sections of the embankment. See Figure 3-3 for the movements of settlement 
points 1 through 23.  The plan location of these points are shown on Fi gure 3-4.  
The last survey data shown from J anuary 2004 indicates that the settlements 
have not increased since 198 7, and any changes over t he past 20 years appear 
to be within the accuracy of the surveys. 
                    
In late 1963, only several months after fi rst filling, major repairs were necessary 
along the interior of the NW section of  embankment, upstream of Panels 91 and 
92. These repairs consisted of excavation,  grouting, developing a concrete cut-
off, and joint repairs.  Throughout the foll owing several years additional repairs 
were continued to control leakage a nd distress to the embankment and 
foundation as well as the face slabs and parapet walls.  As can be seen on the 
plot of crest settlement,  Figure 3-3, as well as variations in the top of the parapet 
wall shown on  Figure 3-5, “Crest Su rvey Data”, surveyed along the dam and 
parapet wall after the breach, there were significant  elevation differences along 
the crest of the parapet wall.   There we re areas such as t hose at parapet Panel 
No. 72 with elevations as low as El  1597 and several other panel areas ranging 
in elevations from EL 1597 to 1598.  Also  shown on Figure 3-5 are elevations of 
the top of the parapet wall for Panels 69 through 75, as surveyed by AmerenUE 
on November 6, 2004.  
 
The leakage from the Upper Reserv oir has been a continuing problem and 
concern beginning in Sept ember 1963.   As an exampl e, during that time a 
sudden increase in seepage  to 103 cfs was experienced and emergency 
measures were taken to repair with concrete  plugging in two holes in the floor at 
panels 91 and 92. Three days later, another episode of increased leakage 
caused another shut-down and  repair.  The repair consisted of excavating a 230 
ft. long by 4 ft. wide trench, excavated to  “rock” and backfilled with concrete at 
Panels 90 to 93 and 95. A number of  repairs were made throughout subsequent 
years focusing more on leakage through the horizontal and vertical joints in the 
concrete facing.  Particular emphasis was on the joints between the concrete 
facing and bedrock, the joint at the toe of the parapet section, and the joint 
between the concrete facing and plinth.  Higher rates of leakage (40 to100 cfs) 
began in 1999 following an exte nded outage.  It is shown in Figure 3-6 that the 
leakage increased significantly afte r 1999 as the plant was used more 
extensively after replacing the runner and  increasing the Plant efficiency. Thus, 
the project suffered from several episode s of seepage concer ns throughout its 
history.  The effects of all of the l eakage on the embankment cannot be exactly 
===PAGE 12===
12 
determined; however, it surely  had an effect on increas ing the settlement up to 
1987 and potential movement of mate rials.  A geomembrane liner was 
subsequently installed in 2004, which si gnificantly reduced the leakage to about 
5 cfs for the 12 months prior to the br each.  Figure 3-6 s hows the history of 
leakage and the periods of repairs.  A chronology of events dating from submittal 
of the geomembrane liner design in January 2002 thr ough the breach event of 
December 14, 2005 is given in Appendix B, which is taken from the FERC Report 
of Findings on the Taum Sauk Upper Dam Failure.  
  
Thus, the Upper Reservoir Embankment has had a long history of settlement and 
high underseepage.  Its performance as an e ffective water barrier was difficult to 
gage, since it has, in-fact, performed over  the past 42 years.  Although there 
were many periods of concern and needed  repair to keep the water within the 
reservoir, the embankment and parapet wall did function as the containment for 
the Upper Reservoir.  The rockfill embank ment, as discussed in Section 3.1, was 
a steep dumped rockfill and t he storage of water on t he high parapet wall was 
unprecedented.  There was most likely no margin for additional loading or 
overtopping, as was the case with the breach on December 14 th.  The holes 
which developed on the upstream side of  Panels 90-95 is the 1963-1964 time 
frame suggested that the plin th was not extended to rock in that area, as should 
have been done, for a normal CFRD constr ucted in the middle 1960’s.  As 
discussed in Section 6, Figures  6-5, 6-6, and 6-7 indicate  that the actual plinth 
was not extended down to rock.  Early project correspondence by J.B. Cooke, 
M.W. Fleer, Raymond Weldy and an unknown Union Electric employee are given 
in Appendix C, which refer to early behavior of the Upper Reservoir and the 
possible resistance to erosion in the event of overpour over the parapet wall. 
 
Horizontal misalignment of joints in t he parapet wall in the area of the breach 
were noted in the 1967 Sa fety Report and in the 2003 Safety Report as given 
below. 
 
In the August 19, 1967 Report on Safety , Mr. Cooke cites offsets in March 1966 
on the order of 1/4 inch with several joints near Panel 88 at 1 to 1.5 inches.  
 
In the 2003 Part 12D Report, the consultant states horizontal movement included 
rotation and translation of the wall joints. The report states:  
 
“The maximum horizontal movement observed was at joint 89/90 and 
106/107, with about 4-5 inches of transla tion and rotational movement.      
--- panel 90 having moved downstream relative to panel 89.  The copper 
waterstop was visible in the joint.  Th is magnitude of move ment is likely 
sufficient to tear the waterstop, but probably does not affect the wall 
stability.” 
 
 
 
===PAGE 13===
13 
4. Standard Operating Procedure 
 
The Taum Sauk project is a peaking a nd emergency reserve facility.  A typical 
daily cycle in the summer is to generate in the morning by releasing water from 
the upper reservoir through the pump/turbines  to the lower reservoir, pump from 
the lower reservoir to the upper reserv oir in the afternoon, generate in the 
evening and pump from the lower reservoi r to the upper reservoir in the early 
morning.  Generation and pump-start and duration is determined by system 
needs and controlled from AmerenUE’s Osage Plant.  In the fall, winter, and 
spring, the number of cycles is typically  less, usually pumping at night and 
generating during the day.  At times, during periods of lo w demand, the facility is 
not operated. 
 
The project is controlled through a micr owave system from the Osage Plant at 
the Lake of the Ozarks, under the direction of the load di spatcher in St. Louis.  
Both units can be put on full load in a few minutes. 
 
Normal automatic settings before the installation of the membrane liner were:
 
 
UPPER RESERVOIR  LOWER RESERVOIR 
     ELEVATIONS         ELEVATIONS 
 
Summer Winter  All seasons 
    [feet]  [feet]   [feet] 
 
1
st pump OFF  1595  1588   739 
 
2
nd pump OFF  1596  1589   736.2 
 
All pumps OFF  1597  1590   736 
 
  
After the installation of the liner and new reservoir level measuring instruments in 
2004, but before Oc tober 2005, the 1 st pump off and 2 nd pump off were Elev. 
1594 and 1596, respectively.  After October  2005, the first pump was to be shut 
down at the indicated Elev. of 1592 and automatic shutdown of the 2 nd pump at 
Elev. 1594.  At Elev. 1594.2, automatic shutdown for both pumps was to be 
initiated if they were not shutdown alr eady.  The 2 ft. lowering  of the shutdown 
elevations for the pumps in October, 2005  was initiated by AmerenUE because 
movements of the protective pipes ho using the pressure transducers in the 
reservoir was noticed as early as October 7, 2005.  This is discussed in more 
detail in Section 7.2 
 
 
 
===PAGE 14===
14 
5. Overpumping Protective Systems  
 
5.1 Upper Reservoir Water Level Monitoring and Control System As Installed 
  
Originally, the upper reservoir water le vel monitoring and cont rol system used a 
floating “skate” for water level monito ring and float operated switches for 
emergency backup pump shutdown and ala rm.  In 2000, the original skate 
system, encoder, and chart recorder were replaced with a differential pressure 
level transmitter, Programmable Logic Co ntroller (PLC), and a digital level 
indicator at the upper reservoir.   As par t of the upper reservoir liner project in 
2004, all of the earlier systems were r eplaced with pressure transducers for 
water level monitoring and control and conductivity probes for emergency backup 
pump shut down and alarm.   
 
The 2005 water level monitoring and co ntrol system uses three 0-100 psi 
pressure transducers lowered into the re servoir to approximately Elev. 1500 and 
enclosed in a protective HDPE pipe.  These transducers produce an electrical 
signal proportional to pressure.  The thr ee electrical signals are converted to 
pressure (feet of water) and then into upper  reservoir water surface level.  All 
three signals are sent to Taum Sauk power plant, Bagnell Dam control center 
and St. Louis control center where their av erage value is displayed as reservoir 
water level and is also used to calculate volume display values.  Individual level 
signals from the transducers can also be displayed at these locations.  
 
A programmable logic controller (PLC) auto matically initiates shut down of the 
first pump at an indicated water level of  Elev. 1592 and automatic shut down of 
the second pump at Elev. 1594.  At Elev. 1594.2, automatic shut down is initiated 
for both pumps if they have not shut dow n already.  Prior to October 2005, the 
pump shutdown levels were Elev. 1594 and Elev. 1596 respectively.  The reason 
for these level changes is discussed in Section 7. 
 
There is also a penstock pressure gauge (t ransducer) located in the power plant 
which can be used to provide an indicati on of upper reservoir water level during 
static conditions.  This instrument is not used for this purpose during operation of 
the pump/turbines since a correction w ould be needed to account for velocity 
head and head loss in the water conduit to t he upper reservoir.  In addition, the 
pressure range of the penstock gauge (tr ansducer) is about 900 feet compared 
to about 235 feet for the upper reserv oir pressure transducers.  Since the 
accuracy of pressure gauges and transducers is typically given as a percent of 
full scale reading, the penstock pressure gauge (transducer) is not as accurate 
as the upper reservoir pressure transducers for determining water level.   
 
An upward adjustment of 0.4 ft. to the pressure transducer readings was made in 
the PLC code on September 27, 2005 in response to visual observation of 
reservoir level at Panel 72 compared to tr ansducer indications.  In addition, on 
October 7, 2005, lateral di splacement of the transduc ers protective pipe was 
===PAGE 15===
15 
observed.  AmerenUE staff recognized t hat the transducer displacement was 
producing reservoir level indications lower than actual levels.  In response, the 
pump automatic shutdown level was lowe red from Elev. 1596 to Elev. 1594 “___ 
so that we won’t pump over the rese rvoir walls.” (a quote from internal 
correspondence). 
 
5.2 Emergency Water Level Protection Backup System As Installed 
  
This system, commissioned in the fall of 2004, uses five Warrick conductivity 
probes with associated relays.  Figure  5-1 is a diagram of the system as 
designed (11/01/2004).  One of the probes is placed near the bottom of the upper 
reservoir and serves as the reference pr obe for the other four  probes.  The Hi 
and the Hi-Hi probes were pl aced at Elevations 1596.0 and 1596.2 respectively 
in November 2004.   The top of the parapet at the probe location is Elev. 1598.   
 
When water reaches the Hi probe, a circui t is completed through the water to the 
reference probe or other grounded metal obj ects to operate the associated Hi 
relay.  A similar circuit is completed w hen the water reaches the Hi-Hi probe to 
operate the associated Hi-Hi relay.    T he remaining two conductivity probes, Lo 
and Lo-Lo, are located near the reservoir bottom and are used for backup 
shutdown in the generating mode of operat ion to prevent vortex formation at the 
intake or draining of the reservoir.   
 
As shown in Figure 5-1, operation of ei ther the Hi relay or the Hi-Hi relay 
provides a signal to the plant to stop the pumps and activate an alarm. 
AmerenUE reported that t he Hi and Hi-Hi probes were  tested at commissioning 
in the fall of 2004 as follows: 
 
“First, the probes were circuit-checked to  ensure that they would activate the 
pump shutoff signal and the alarm.  Sec ond, the probes were placed in water to 
simulate their operation in the upper reservoir.  The pump shutoff signal at the 
plant was concurrently monitored to verify  that the probes properly activated the 
pump shutoff signal and alarm when the probes  were placed in water.  Third, 
once the upper reservoir was filled, t he Hi and Hi-Hi probes were immersed in 
the reservoir to confirm that the probes properly activated the pump shutoff signal 
and alarm.” 
 
In December 2004, the PLC logic was ch anged so that both relays had to be 
energized for sixty seconds to provide a signal to stop the pumps and activate an 
alarm.  In addition, both the Hi and Hi- Hi probes were reportedly raised to 
Elevations 1596.7 and 1596.9 respective ly as shown on Fi gure 5-2. These 
changes were documented in comments withi n the PLC code and as revision 15 
to drawing 8303-P-26648.   
 
During the post-breach interview process,  AmerenUE’s Vice President of Power 
Operations expressed the opinion that  the Hi and Hi-Hi probes may never have 
===PAGE 16===
16 
been set at Elevations 1596.7 and  1596. 9 as recorded on electrical drawing 
8303-P-26648 Rev. 15 and as noted in comments in the associated PLC 
program.  He noted that t he probe cables had only tw o tape bands on each one 
and that they were separated by 18 inch es, the distance between the original 
probe elevations and the final as found elevations.   
 
The tape bands were apparently used to reference the probe elevation with 
respect to the top of the protective pipe .  There were no marks on the cables to 
indicate that the probes were ever set at intermediate elevations.  The question 
of when and why the Hi and Hi-Hi probes were raised to the post-breach as 
found elevations is an interesting one, but  it does not affect the analysis of the 
cause for the reservoir breach.      
 
The alarm output is initiated by the Hi- Hi- probe and not the Hi probe.  This is 
contrary to normal alarm and trip practice which gives an alarm first followed by a 
trip if the parameter being measured contin ues changing in an unsafe direction.  
Vibration, pressure, level, and tem perature are parameter s that are often 
monitored by two sensors; one to prov ide an alarm function and the second to 
provide the trip or shutdown function. 
 
Figure 5-3 (02/15/2005) shows a logic chan ge requiring both, rather than either, 
the Hi and the Hi-Hi pr obe to be wet for sixty seconds in order to initiate a pump 
shutdown.   
5.3 Overpumping Protection Response on December 14, 2005 
 
5.3.1 Response of Water Level Monitoring and Control System 
 
As noted above, both units were in the pumping mode in the early morning of 
December 14, 2005.  At 04:39, Unit #2 was shut down autom atically at an 
indicated upper reservoir water level of Elev. 1591. 6.  At 05:15, Un it #1 was shut 
down manually by the Bagnell Dam control center operat or in accordance with 
instructions from St. Louis control center  to shutdown just shy of where it would 
shut down automatically (Elev. 1594).  At that time, the reservoir level reading 
was Elev. 1593.7.   The automatic shut  down of the first pump and the non-
automatic shut down of the second pump is consistent with level information from 
the pressure transducers and the automat ic shut down elevations described 
above.   
 
Since the reservoir overtopped and the top of  the parapet wall at its lowest point 
is at Elev. 1597, it, it is clear that t he actual water level exceeded the indicated 
Elev. 1593.7 and that the pressure transducer signals were in error.   
 
===PAGE 17===
17 
 
 
5.3.2 Response of Water Level Protection Backup System 
 
No shutdown or alarm was produced from  the conductivity probe backup system 
on December 14, 2005.   
 
6. December 14, 2005 Breach 
 
6.1 General Descriptions and Observations 
 
On December 14, 2005, an uncontrolled release of  water from the upper 
reservoir occurred at the Taum Sauk Pu mped Storage Project resulting in the 
damage shown in Figures 6-1 and 6-2.  The time history of the reservoir 
transducers and the penstock transducer just before, during, and after the breach 
is shown in Figure 6-3.  It  is shown on Figure 6-3 t hat the full breach developed 
within about 25 minutes from the initial dropping of the reservoir level. 
 
The upper reservoir of t he Taum Sauk Pumped Storag e Project was overtopped 
during the final pumping cycle the morning of December 14, 200 5.  Overtopping 
of the 10 ft high parapet wall and subse quent breach of the rockfill embankment 
formed a breach about 720 feet wide at the top of the rockfill dam and 430 feet at 
the base of the dam.  Reservoir data indi cate that pumping st opped at 5:15 AM 
December 14, 2005 with the initial breac h forming at approximately the same 
time. Breach widening form ed quickly, and complete evacuation of the 4,350 
acre-ft upper reservoir occurred withi n about 25 minutes.  The breach flow 
passed into the East Fork of the Bla ck River (the river upstream of the lower 
Taum Sauk Dam) through a State park and campground area and into the lower 
reservoir as shown Figure 1-3.  Upon  leaving the Lower Taum Sauk Dam 
Spillway area, the flows proceeded downstream of the Black River to the town of 
Lesterville, MO, located about 3.5 miles downstream from th e Lower Dam. The 
incremental rise in the river level was about 2 feet which remained within the 
banks of the river. 
 
During IPOC inspections at the site, a good cross-section of the embankment 
could be observed on the north side of t he breach as shown in Figure 6-4.  In 
Figure 6-4 the dumped rockfill can be obs erved below the upper 20 ft of 
compacted rockfill.  The rockf ill exposed in this section is dirtier than a normal 
rockfill and as such would be more erodi ble and would be less free draining than 
a normal rockfill.  In fact Dr. Frank Nickell  (one of the original consultants during 
design) mentioned in one of his reports that the rockf ill with the most fines could 
be used in the upper 20 ft of compacted ro ckfill for the roadway on the outside of 
the parapet wall. 
 
A residual soil zone of weat hered rhyolite could also be observed in the breach 
area; and one location is shown in Figure 6-4.  The re sidual soil was observed to 
===PAGE 18===
18 
be clayey and it was judged to have an effective shear strength almost dictated 
by the clay portion of the soil.  Exposed  rhyolite bedrock is  also observed in 
Figure 6-4 as well as the remnants of the lower face slab and plinth. 
 
A closer view of the exposed rhyolite bedrock and residual soil is shown in Figure 
6-5.  This photo is taken looking east and t he rather flat looking joint surface in 
the rhyolite dips toward the camera in a westerly direction.  This discontinuity 
was observed in the field to dip nearly west at a dip of about 10
o.  This 
discontinuity is described as Fracture Set 8 (FS-8) in the Rizzo Report and is 
reported to have a dip of 8 o and a dip azimuth of 270 o.  As a result of the 
observation of the residual soil, the IPOC requested that  samples of the residual 
soil be taken for direct shear testing.   
 
The general geology of the breach area is given in t he FERC Report and in the 
Rizzo Report on the Taum Sauk failure.  The general geology is not repeated 
here but it is important to reiterate the most im portant engineering geology 
feature associated with the f oundation of the Upper Dam.   The low dipping joint 
surface shown in Figure 6-5 is important in that it serves to give a foundation 
discontinuity which daylights to the west side of the embankment and gives a 
foundation that in general di ps downhill at about 8-10
o in the direction of the 
applied water forces.  In addition some of these joint surfaces appear to have 
clay coatings.  The residua l soil from weathering of t he rhyolite also presents a 
zone of weakness as the relic  rock structure present yiel ds zones of preferential 
weakness along the orientati on of the flat joint set de scribed above.  This can 
yield a situation where the residual soil  left in the foundation of the dam would 
control the stability of t he embankment rather than the shear strength of the 
rockfill. 
 
Figures 6-6, 6-7, and 6-8 show three views of the area under the base of the 
bottom of the face slab and plinth.  The most glaring issue revealed by Figure 6-6 
for example is that it appear s that the plinth was not taken down to the rhyolite 
bedrock shown at the bottom of  the photo.  This is not  considered good practice 
today and it was not good practice in 1963 .  Figures 6-7 and 6-8 show similar 
construction along the plinth area.  This  observation makes it consistent to 
rationalize the blow outs and holes that ha d to be repaired upstream of Panels 
90-95 in 1963 and 1964.  It definitely app ears from these inspections that the 
plinth was not extended to bedrock for this dam, at least in the breach area. 
 
6.2 Estimate of Peak Reservoir Elevation 
 
A post breach survey by KdG is shown in  Figure 3-5 and in Fi gure 6-9.  These 
figures show the breach area includi ng Panels 88 through 99.  The survey 
indicates that there are 4 areas where there is evid ence of overflow.  These 
areas include:  
 
 
===PAGE 19===
19 
  Panels 10, 11, 12 
  Panels 88 to 103 
  Panels 43 to 56 
  Panels 69 to 74 
 
Taking into account the elevations of t he end panels in each overflow group from 
Figure 3-5 it appears as if the maximum reservoir level could range between 
Elev. 1597.7 and 1597.9.   
 
Another independent estimate of the maximum reservoir elevation reached can 
be obtained from a comparison of the reservoir levels m easured by the pressure 
transducers in the reservoir and by the penstock reservoir transducer on 
December 13 and 14, 2005.  It was shown fo r the months of January, February, 
and March of 2005 that both the reservoi r and penstock readings in these winter 
months were very close to each other  and read very clos e to 1596 when the 
reservoir was full.  The following r eadings were indicated on December 13
th and 
14th. 
 
Date Time  
 
Level Reservoir 
Transducer 
Level Penstock 
Transducer 
12/13/05 5:50 1591.68 1595.88 
12/13/05 7:20 1581.52 1585.71 
12/14/05 5:15 1593.70 ------ 
 
 
It is noted the readings at 5:50 AM on December 13
th show the penstock 
readings to be 4.2 ft. higher than the levels  from the reservoir transducers just 
after the reservoir had been pumped full.  At 7:20 AM on December 13, 2005 the 
penstock readings were also 4.2 ft. higher than the reservoir readings after the 
reservoir was drawn down about 10 ft. and held.  On December 14 th at 5:15 AM 
the maximum reservoir level indicated by the reservoir transducers was 1593.7 
and at that time the last pump had just shut off and the penstock reading was still 
affected by transients.  But if on the basis  of past readings, if it is assumed that 
during the winter months that the pensto ck reading is near correct and that on 
the 13
th and 14th of December that t he reading of the reserv oir transducers were 
about 4.2 ft too low, as established on the December 13 th readings, then the 
maximum reservoir level could have been 1593.7 + 4.2 = 1597.90 ft. 
 
 
Since the Hi-Hi Warrick Probe is set at El ev.1597.70 and did not shut the units 
down, it is most likely that the highest reservoir elevation did not rise greater than 
1597.70. 
 
If it is noted that the original survey pins 18 and 19 (Figure 3-4) correspond to 
Panels 90 and 95 within the breach area and it  is shown on Figure 3-3 that the 
2004 elevation of Pin 18 and Pin 19 are 1587.5 and 1587.4, respectively.  Then 
===PAGE 20===
20 
the top of the wall at Panels 90 and 95 were 1597. 5 and 1597.4, respectively, 
which would give overtopping of  0.2 ft and 0.3 ft respectively at these locations.   
The overtopping depth of Panel 72 would have been 1597.7 minus 1597.0, or 0.7 
ft for a maximum reservoir level of 1597.7 ft. 
 
Thus it is indicated that the depth of flow over the wall at Panel 72 was about 2 to 
3 times the depth of flow over Panels 90 and 95 in the breach area.  The fact that 
the breach occurred between Panels 88 and 99 could be d ue to variations in 
rockfill.  It is interesting to note a letter fr om Mr. M. W. Dille on May 23, 1970.  In 
this letter he summarizes some recent er osion due to rains, by saying that: 
“There were several small washes noted in the fine fill ar ea between Panels 88 
through 110.”  He also analyzed weir gage  readings and noted that: “The gage 
readings are generally down wh ile the leakage is up.  The “fish pond” area, say 
between Panels 90 and 102 is up in leakage.” 
  
These comments, in general, indicate an  awareness that this area was more 
sensitive than other areas of  the embankment.  The comm ents also indicate that 
the rockfill could be finer between Panels 88 and 110 than for other areas of the 
embankment. 
 
7. Technical Causes of Breach 
 
7.1 Response of Overpumping Protective Systems on December 14, 2005 
 
As noted above, both units were in the pumping mode in the early morning of 
December 14, 2005.  At 04:39, Unit #2 was shut down autom atically at an 
indicated upper reservoir water level of Elev. 1591. 6.  At 05:15, Un it #1 was shut 
down manually by the Bagnell Dam control center operat or in accordance with 
instructions from St. Louis control center  to shutdown just shy of where it would 
shut down automatically (Elev. 1594).  At that time, the reservoir level reading 
was Elev. 1593.7.   The automatic shut  down of the first pump and the non-
automatic shut down of the second pump is consistent with level information from 
the pressure transducers and the automat ic shut down elevations described 
above.   
 
Since the reservoir overtopped and the top of  the parapet wall at its lowest point 
is at Elev. 1597, it is clear  that the actual water level exceeded the indicated 
Elev. 1593.7 and that the pressure tran sducer signals were in error.  No 
shutdown or alarm was produced from the conductivity probe backup system on 
December 14, 2005. 
 
7.2 Upper Reservoir Water Level Monitoring and Control System as Found 
 
Following the reservoir failure, the pressure transducers were removed from their 
protective pipe and re-ca librated.  The pressure transducers in service on 
December 13-14, 2005 are identified as TX2 and TX3.  TX1 had been removed 
===PAGE 21===
21 
from service earlier.  The complete ca libration test report by Siemens is 
contained in Appendix A of the Rizzo Report.   
 
Figure 7-1 shows plots of ma output vers us PSIG for TX2 and TX3 compared to 
a reference (ideal) transducer.  Both TX2 and TX3 have linear response to 
pressure but TX2’s ma output represents about a 7.86 feet higher indication than 
the reference curve while TX3’s ma out put represents about  0.85 feet higher 
indication than the reference curve.  Fi gure 6 on page 20 of 76 in Appendix A of 
the Rizzo report shows that the as found PL C logic includes a subtraction of 9.38 
feet from the TX2 pressure  indication and a subtraction of 2.4 feet from the TX3 
pressure indication.  The basis for t hese adjustment values  is not stated in 
Appendix A of the Rizzo report. 
 
If the pressure transducers were locat ed at the design elevation of 1500, these 
PLC subtractions in the pressure indicati ons would be greater than they should 
have been based on the post-breach transducer calib rations and would have 
resulted in level readings about 1.5 f eet lower than they should have been.  
However, if the pressure transducers we re located above elevation 1500, the 
PLC subtraction values may have been sele cted to adjust the level readings to 
match the actual reservoir level.  As such, the subtraction values would have 
adjusted the level readings for both the transducer offsets as well as actual 
elevation of the transducers.  
 
Figure 7-2 shows plots of ma output ve rsus temperature for TX2 and TX3 at a 
constant pressure of 40 PSIG (high upper reservoir level).  While TX3 shows little 
response to temperature change, TX 2 shows an unusual ma output shift 
between 5 degrees and 20 degrees.  At temperatures below 5 degrees, TX2 
indicates the pressure to be about 7.11 f eet higher than that above 20 degrees 
for an actual constant pressure of 40 PSIG. 
  
On December 13-14, 2005 the water temp erature was in the 5 degree range.  
Since the upper reservoir level was calculated as the average of TX2 and TX3 on 
this date, the TX2 temperat ure shift output would have resulted in an indicated 
level of 3.56 feet higher than actual assuming that TX2 h ad been adjusted to 
match the actual level when the water temperature was above 20 degrees.  By 
itself, the temperature response of TX2 as the water cooled would have indicated 
higher water levels and produced pump shutdowns at lower actual upper 
reservoir elevations for the same setpoint shutdown elevations.   
 
Prior to removal of pressure transduc er TX1 from service on September 27, 
2005; the influence of temperature shift response in TX2 on the water level 
indication would have been less since it represented only one of three readings 
used in the average.  After removal of TX 1 from service, TX2 represented one of 
two readings used in the averaging proce ss.  Accordingly, the water level 
indication error due to water temperatur e changes would have been greater after 
September 27, 2005. 
===PAGE 22===
22 
 
In response to FERC Question No. 29d:, AmerenUE responded in part “It 
appears that TX2 did not exhibit the 0.5 ma  shift until tested at the GE facility 
under extreme and abrupt te mperature changes.”  In any case, such a 
temperature shift response in cold water would have resulted in a higher water 
level indication rather than a lower indication.  
 
A visual examination of the pressure tr ansducer protective pipes, Figures 7-3 
through 7-5, shows that the protective  pipes had moved from their straight 
alignment in the lower elevat ion of the reservoir.  Since the transducer cables 
remained fixed at their instrument box on the parapet wall (Figure 7-6), any 
movement of the protective pipes from their initial straight alignment would 
produce an upward movement of the pr essure transducer and a corresponding 
negative error in the water level reading.   That is, the reported water level would 
be less than the actual level. 
 
To avoid penetrations of the liner mate rial and the creation of possible leakage 
paths, the protective pipes were supported on plastic plat es that were connected 
by eye bolts to two stainless steel guide cables.  The cables were secured only at 
the bottom and top of the reservoir.  Fi gures 7-7 and 7-8 s how these support 
systems as found after the breach event. 
 
An internal e-mail from September 27,  2005, written two days after Hurricane 
Rita, stated “This morning Jeff and I went up to the upper reservoir when the 
controls indicated we were at 1596 elev .  There were no waves on the surface 
but we could see a couple of wet areas on the west side of the reservoir parapet 
walls.  We pulled the vehicle up to these wet areas and climbed on top of the 
vehicle to see the water level.  We were  surprised to see the level within four 
inches of the top of the wa ll.  It was above the top ba tten strip holding the vinyl 
on.  This level is at least six inches higher than what I re member from when we 
first came back from the controls upgrade last  fall.  Jeff looked at the level xmtrs 
when we got back to the plant and found one of the three reading a foot higher 
than the other two.  When he took that one xmtr out of  the average we now read 
about 1596.2.  I still feel we  are about another .4 feet hi gher than that.  Jeff then 
added a .4 adjustment to the two rema ining xmtr average making the current 
level now read 1596.6.   We’ll check on what this does to the actual level the next 
several mornings.” 
 
Figures 7-9 through 7-11 show upper reserv oir water level readings taken during 
and prior to the Hurricane Rita event.    
 
Figure 7-12 (09/27/2005) shows the dis abling of one upper reservoir pressure 
transducer and one lower reservoir pressu re transducer and the addition of the 
0.4 feet offset in the upper reservoir level indication. 
 
===PAGE 23===
23 
Another internal e-mail also indicates that the protective  pipe movement was 
observed as early as October 7, 2005 and that the pump shutdown set point was 
lowered from Elev. 1596 to Elev. 1594 “ __so that we won’t pump over the 
reservoir walls.”   
 
Figure 7-13 shows water level readings from December 2, 2005.  Until the 
second pump turned on for the second time , the water level fluctuations are 
relatively small and may be due to surface wave action or small movement of the 
pressure transducers within the protective pipe.  However, after restart of the 
second pump, these level reading fluct uations increased dramatically and no 
longer have a stable periodicity.  
 
Figure 7-14 shows a continuation of wa ter level readings from December 2, 
2005.  Once the level rose above about  Elev. 1563, the large fluctuations 
decrease significantly and are very small when the water level was falling during 
generation later in the day.  This pattern of water level fluctuations is found on 
most days after December 2, 2005. Th is evidence suggests that the pump 
discharge pattern created substantial forces acting on the protective pipes and/or 
the support cables when the wa ter level is lower and that these forces diminish 
as the flow discharge pattern shifts upwar d at higher water levels.  The evidence 
also suggests that the generation mode flow pattern into the intake is more stable 
and produces much less disturbance to the pr otective pipes.  This is consistent 
with the much higher exit losses associated with discharge into an open reservoir 
compared to entrance losses for the same geometry.  
 
The actual forces acting on the protecti ve pipes and/or the support cables during 
pumping may have resulted from the flow ar ound them.  Flow over the protective 
pipes and cables may also have produced  Von Karman vortex shedding.  Such 
vortices would produce alternate forces to ward the reservoir wall and away from 
the reservoir wall.  Forces away from t he reservoir wall would reduce the normal 
force between the pipe support plates and the reservoir liner.  This reduced 
normal force might have allowed slipping of the support plate and pipes along the 
reservoir liner. 
  
The graphs of upper reservoir water level for December 1
st through December 
13, 2005 show relatively stable indications during generation with one or both 
units, standstill and pumping with only one uni t.  However, once a second pump 
starts, the water level indications are gener ally more erratic.  This tends to 
confirm that the higher flow from two pumps is providing the force moving the 
pressure transducers protective pipe. 
 
A review of two pump operations durin g 2005 shows that t he upper reservoir 
water level indications are reasonably st able until early August.  Figures 7-15 
through 7-22 are examples of these leve ls from the pressure transducers.  
Beginning in early August, the water le vel plots begin to show the erratic 
behavior that increased until December 14, 2005. 
===PAGE 24===
24 
 
Figure 7-23 shows an interesting pattern of water level readings for December 
10, 2005 with both units off followed by bot h units generating.  We don’t know if 
these level fluctuations are due to trans ducer movement or other causes.  The 
left portion of the plot seems to be damping out until the disturbance around 
14:24.  The subsequent fluctuations appear  to be building in amplitude until the 
two generators began operation. 
 
Figure 7-24 shows the water level read ings from the star t of both pumps on 
December 13, 2005 through the reservoir failure on December 14, 2005.  The –
222 MW arrow shows the indicated water le vel when pump 2 completed its start 
sequence.  The water level indication remained level for about 12 minutes rather 
than immediately beginning the more rapid ra te of rise that it should have.  At 
that level of Elev. 1550, two pumps were  producing a level rise of about 10 feet 
per hour or about 2 feet in those 12 minutes.  Wh ile there were smaller 
subsequent level indication fluctuations, they did not restore the level readings 
back to the trend line shown.   
 
The most logical explanation is that during those twelve minutes the transducers 
were moving up at about the same rate as the water level, hence showing no 
level change during the interval.  The li ne labeled “Level trend without offset” 
shows where the water level indications should have been without the offset.  It 
should be noted that the level indication at the beginning of  the plot is not 
necessarily accurate given the many indi cations of prior transducer movement 
and erratic readings.  It is  also possible that generat ing mode flows past the 
transducers may have tended to bring the protective pipes back to near their 
original positions resulting in some periodic level error corrections.   
 
Figure 7-25 shows indicated upper reservoir water levels  around the time of the 
breach on December 14, 2005.  A tr end line has been adde d to show the 
calculated rate of rise for one pump operat ion at the maximum reservoir level.  
Note that the measured water level rate of rise matches the calculated trend line 
very closely to within a few minutes of the rapid drop in level.  This suggests that 
the breach occurred very quickly after shut down of the second pump.   
 
With a 15 minute per foot rate of rise for one pump and a minimum parapet 
elevation of 1597 at panel 72, more than 15 minutes would have been required to 
raise the water level from Elev. 1597 to Elev. 1598 since overtopping would have 
been occurring at panel 72 and other locations.   Figure 7-25 does not show such 
a long period of reduced rate of rise prior to the breac h.  Therefore, the water 
level could not have reached as high as Elev. 1598.  
 
Figure 7-26 is an enlargement of Figure 7-25 with two trend lines added.  The left 
trend line represents rising water level prior to overtopping and the right trend line 
represents a reduced rate of level rise associated with beginning of overtopping.  
The lines intersect at about 5:07 AM sugges ting that the actual level was around 
===PAGE 25===
25 
Elev. 1597 at the time.  An adjusted wate r level scale is included on the right of 
the plot based on an Elevat ion of 1597 at 5:07 AM.  Th is analysis is based on 
level indications at the s outh end of the reservoir and does not include delay 
times associated with distance to the overtopping locations.   
 
Figure 7-27 is a plot of maximum daily  water level indica tions for December 
2005.  The plot shows that level indicati ons as high as that shown for December 
14, 2005 were achieved on many earlier days.   Since reservoir failure did not 
occur on those dates, it suggests that the level reading offset described above for 
December 13, 2005 is pr imarily responsible for the fa ilure to shut down the last 
pump.  As noted above, that offset resu lted in the actual wa ter level being at 
least two feet higher than the pressure transducers indicated.  
 
The buildup in level indication variat ions during pumping and the smoother level 
indications during generation suggest that the protective pipes were displaced 
due to pumping flows and tended to straighten out from generation flows and 
perhaps their own weight.   We cannot be certain that the protective pipes always 
straightened out fully afte r a generation operation, so there may have been a 
residual level error when the pumps st arted on the evening of December 13, 
2005 and at other times as well.   
 
During our interview process, we asked operators from Osage and the St. Louis 
control center to describe the displays av ailable to them showing upper reservoir 
water level.  All interviewees stated that they have digital information as well as 
graphical displays of water level versus ti me.  We then asked if they had ever 
seen any unusual indications on the graphical displays and all but one stated that 
they had not seen unusual indications.  One interviewee did respond as follows; 
“I have seen a time or two where we’ve had a level problem, it would freeze up 
momentarily, and we’ve had them call and reset and it popped right back.  I’ve 
seen that maybe once or twice.” 
 
We conclude that the failure of the second pump to shutdown automatically 
based on water level indication was due to level errors resulting from 
accumulated movement of the pressure transducers within their protective pipes 
including the twelve minutes of two unit s pumping on December 13, 2005 during 
which no level increase was indicated by the pressure transducers.  Since the 
water temperature was in the 5 degree ran ge on this evening, any influence of 
the TX2 temperature res ponse would have been in the opposite direction to 
physical raising of the pressure transducers.  
 
7.3 Emergency Water Level Protection Backup System as Found 
 
An internal e-mail dated October 7, 2005 stated “The Hi and Hi-Hi Warrick 
probes are 7” and 4” from the top of the wall respectively.  So if on 9-27 the level 
was 4” below the wall the Hi level Warrick should have picked up.”  And “If you 
want to lower the Hi level probes we can do  that but I think we chose the levels 
===PAGE 26===
26 
so that normal wave action wouldn’t cause nuisance trips.”  Since the top of the 
wall at the location of the Warrick pr obes was determined to be at Elev. 1597.92 
by AmerenUE in 2004 and 1598.0 by Kd G after the breach in December 2005 
the Hi-Hi probe could have ranged betwe en Elev. 1597.59 an d 1597.67; the Hi 
probes could have ranged from 1597.35 to 1597.42. 
 
After the breach, the Hi and Hi-Hi conductivity probes were found to be 4” and 7” 
below the top of the wall as described in the above e-mail of October 7, 2005.  As 
shown on Figure 7-28, this places the Hi -Hi probe above the top of Panel 95 
(1597.39), in the breached ar ea and above the top of P anel 72 (1596.99), the 
minimum elevation of any panel in the re servoir.  We received no documents or 
interview responses indicating why or w hen the conductivity probes were raised 
to these elevations.   
 
Since the conductivity probe system had operated correctly when tested at 
commissioning in the fall of 2004, we in vestigated the following possible reasons 
for failure to respond before the breach. 
 
Estimates of the maximum reservoir wate r level achieved prior to the breach 
were made by several parties using the following methods: 
 
• Elev. 1597.63 based on examination of dike crest for evidence of water 
spill (erosion). 
• Elev. 1596.74 based on post breach observed vertical movement of 
transducer pipes. 
• Elev. 1597.4 based on examination of  pressure transducer data for 
reduction in rate of rise while pump ing suggesting Elev ation 1597 (panel 
72). 
 
Figure 7-29 shows areas of erosion around the upper  reservoir perimeter.  
Estimates of the maximum reservoir water level were made by noting the parapet 
levels adjacent to these erosion areas. 
 
AmerenUE measured a 14 foot lateral displacement of the transducer pipes over 
an arc length of 119 feet in the displaced pipe as found after the breach event.  
This results in a calculated vertical mo vement of about 3 feet for the enclosed 
transducers.  Adding 3 feet to the ma ximum measured water level of 1593.74 
gives an adjusted water level of 1596.74. 
 
It should be noted that the as found displa ced position of the transducer pipes 
does not necessarily repres ent the maximum position achieved prior to the 
breach event.  In the days following the event, the transducer pipes gradually 
straightened out and moved back to near thei r original position.  As such, the 
actual vertical movement of the pressure transducers was likely somewhat higher 
than the calculated 3 feet value. 
 
===PAGE 27===
27 
Figure 7-30 shows a maximum water le vel of about Elev. 1597.4 based on 
indexing the pressure transducer record to Elev. 1597 when th e rate of rise 
decreased during one pump operation.  
 
Figure 7-28 is a summary of the results including the as found elevations of the 
Hi and Hi-Hi conductivity probes.  The es timated level during breach is a shown 
as a range of levels dependent on method of calculation noted above.  The 
maximum water level based on the as f ound displaced shape of the transducer 
pipes is excluded for the reason given above.  
 
While some estimates of maximum water level are higher than the Hi probe 
elevation, none of the selected estimates reach the Hi-Hi probe elevation.  These 
results are consistent with the fact  than no probe alarms were recorded on 
December 14, 2005 since an alarm is onl y initiated from the Hi-Hi probe and not 
from the Hi probe. 
  
While we consider the above to be the most likely explanation for failure of the 
conductivity probe system to initiate pump shutdown, we considered the following 
additional possibilities. 
 
At our request, a series of tests was cond ucted to investigate the sensitivity of 
the probe system to the following conditions: 
 
• Clear vs. turbid water. 
• Water temperature variation. 
• Relay supply voltage variation. 
• Ice on probes. 
 
The results demonstrated t hat the conductivity pro bes and relays performed 
satisfactorily for all test conditions.   
 
However, the investigation documented a programming error in the Unit #2 pump 
shutdown logic.  This PLC error, made on September 16, 2005, disabled the Unit 
#2 shutdown in response to operation of any conductivity probe (Lo, Lo-Lo, Hi, 
Hi-Hi).   The Unit #1 shutdown logic did no t include this error.  Figure 7-31 shows 
the final as found shutdown logic. 
 
Since Unit #2 was shutdow n manually on December 14,
 2005, the programming 
error was not a factor in the overtopping event.  Based on the above test results, 
Unit #1 would have shutdown automatic ally if the Hi and Hi-Hi probes had 
remained wet for the required sixty seconds. 
 
We conclude that the Hi and Hi-Hi conductivity probes were located too high to 
initiate pump shutdown and prevent overtopping of the upper reservoir.  As noted 
above, the programming error in the Unit #2 shutdown logic wa s not a factor in 
the December 14, 2005 breach of the upper reservoir. 
===PAGE 28===
28 
 
 
7.4 Overtopping of Embankment Dam 
 
7.4.1 Sensitivity of Taum Sauk Dumped Rockfill Dam to Overtopping 
 
It is well known in the Dam Engine ering profession that overtopping of 
embankment dams is one of the most fr equent causes of embankment dam 
failures.  In 1972 Buffalo Creek Dam in We st Virginia failed by overtopping and 
118 persons were killed.  The dam was built from mine wastes.  In 1977 two 
earth dams on the same river in Braz il were overtopped and failed during a 
storm.  In 1964 flow through a 200 ft high section of Hell Hole Dam in California, 
under construction, resulted in a failure  and the dam had to be rebuilt.  The 
downstream slope of the dumped rockfill was a 1.3:1 slope which had a dominant 
size (diameter for 50% passing), Leps 1973,  of about 8-12 inches.  In any case, 
the Hell Hole failure is an incident where the exiting of seepage on a 1.3:1 
dumped rockfill slope resulted in erosion and instability of the slope. 
 
Because all embankment dams are consider ed to be vulnerable to failure by 
overtopping, embankment dams usually have  spillways and failures still result in 
some cases due to either inadequate spil lway capacity or impr oper operation of 
spillway gates, caused by human error. 
 
In the case of pumped stor age projects, the Upper Rese rvoir in many cases is 
not connected to a river and the reservoir levels are determined solely by the 
controlled pumping and generating activities.  A study of precedent indicates that 
based on the philosophy of the various owner s and engineers that some of these 
projects have a spillway capacity equal to the pumping capacity and others have 
no spillway at all and rely  on controlling the reservoir level and terminating the 
pumping at predetermined reservoir leve ls.  The Taum Sauk Project was 
constructed without a spillw ay and thus was dependent on monitoring to control 
reservoir levels to prevent overtopping.  It is interesting that in the middle 1960’s 
that Taum Sauk and Cabin Creek were  the only two pumped storage projects 
without spillways on the Upper Reservoir to pass errant pump overflows. 
 
Although it should be assumed in design that all embankment dams will fail if 
overtopped, some rockfill dams are more sens itive to failure by overtopping than 
others depending on the st eepness of the downstream slope, the compactness 
of the rockfill, and the percentages of sand and fines in the rockfill. 
 
Based on the appearance of  the breach slopes at the Taum Sauk rockfill 
embankment during the initia l inspection of December 15, 2005, it was evident 
that the embankment in the area of t he breach was not constructed as a normal 
rockfill embankment.  At best it should be cl assified as a “dirty rockfill” in the 
breach area as is shown in Figure 6-4.  The recent drilli ng and investigation 
program conducted by Paul C. Rizzo Asso ciates (PCR) has also indicated that 
===PAGE 29===
29 
the Upper Reservoir Embankment material s contain much finer materials than 
expected for a rockfill embankment.  The recent program conducted in January 
2006 involved drilling (7) bor ings using a 6 inch sa mpler and sonic drilling 
techniques.  Even after correcting and adjusting for the smaller samples, the 
inferred rockfill gradations indicated fines  contents as high as 20% passing the # 
200 sieve.  Reference PCR Forensic Report Dated April 6, 2006. 
 
Studies of the rockfill gradations at T aum Sauk by PCR have resulted in the 
Lower and Upper bound grain si ze distribution curves, as shown in Figure 7-5 of 
the PCR Report and given in Figure 7-32 in this report.  It is shown in Figure 7-32 
that for the upper bound sizes of rockfill at  Taum Sauk that the dominant size 
(50% passing) is 4 inches and that for the lower bound sizes that the dominant 
size is about 3/8 inch.  Thus the domi nant size of rock fill at Taum Sauk is 
significantly smaller than the Hell Hole dominant size range of 8-12 inches, as 
discussed above; thus the rockfill at Taum  Sauk would be considered to be more 
vulnerable to erosion than the Hell Hole rockfill.  Panel Member Hendron had the 
opportunity to inspect the rockfill at t he rebuilt Hell Hole Dam in 1966 and can 
attest that the gabbro rockfill at Hell Hole Dam was much stronger and of larger 
size than the Taum Sauk rockfill.  The Hell Hole rock appeared not to have any 
materials passing the No. 200 sieve, wher eas the range of curves shown in 
Figure 7-32 indicate that there was from 0-20% passing the No. 200 sieve and 
from 0 to 45% sand in the rockfill at Taum Sauk.  Due to the steep downstream 
slope and the small dominant size range of the dumped rockfill at Taum Sauk it is 
the Panel’s judgment that the Upper Reservoir embankm ent dam slopes in the 
area of the breach were composed of “d irty” rockfill and were very erodible as 
compared to other rockfill dams, especiall y other compacted rockfill dams.  In 
fact the historical docum entation of the project c ontains many comments by 
James Barry Cooke and others about the erosion of portions of the slopes due to 
rainfall. 
 
It is noteworthy that Cabin Creek Dam was constructed as an upper reservoir 
dam for a pumped storage project in Colorado.  This dam was completed about a 
year after Taum Sauk and consisted of gr anite rockfill compacted in two ft thick 
lifts with a maximum size of 2 ft.  T he rockfill did not have measurable amounts 
passing the #200 sieve and had a maximum percentage pas sing the 1-inch size 
of 10%.  The downstream rockfill slope was 1.75:1.  This dam was overtopped by 
over pumping but did not  fail.  It is no doubt in large part due to the fact that the 
dam was well compacted clean rockfill,  as opposed to being dumped, and the 
downstream rockfill slope was somewhat flatter at 1.75:1 as compared to the 
dumped “dirty” rockfill slope of 1.3:1 at Taum Sauk. 
 
The “dirty” rockfill found at Taum Sauk, wit h as much as 45% sand plus fines, 
was likely not free draining for the flows imposed by overtopping.  Thus, the flows 
from overtopping could increase the phreatic levels beneath the parapet wall and 
within the downstream slope.  In the case of a steep downstream slope of 1.3:1, 
the phreatic levels do not need to be increased very much to cause instability of 
===PAGE 30===
30 
many potential failure surfaces.  T he designs of steep sloped CFRD’s are 
predicated on the assumption that the ro ckfill is free draining.  The rockfill found 
at the Taum Sauk Breach may in fact not be free draining, and increases in 
piezometric levels caused by the overto pping flows could also have initiated 
stability failures of various portions of t he slope and/or sliding and overturning of 
the parapet wall, as well as erosion.  
 
The failure of the Gouhou Concrete Face  Sand and Gravel Dam in China, on 
August 27, 1993, is pertinent to the Taum Sauk breach.  Gouhou Dam had an 
upstream slope of 1.6:1 and a downstr eam slope of 1.5:1 and was a well 
compacted gravel which contained, on the average, about 40% sand.  The top of 
the face slab was at Elev.  3277.35 me ters where there was a joint between the 
horizontal footing of a parapet wall and t he top of the face slab.  The dam had 
been in service for more than 3 years but  the reservoir level had never exceeded 
Elev. 3277.35 meters.  An investigation of the failure found that the dam failed 
within about 24 hours after the water elev ation exceeded 3277.35 meters.  It was 
concluded from this study , in a paper by Zuyu Chen , October 1993, that the 
infiltration into the gravel-sand fill, from the face slab-parapet wall joint, increased 
the phreatic surfaces in the dam due to th e fact that the gravel-sand fill was not 
free-draining and resulted in failure of the downstream slope.  This particular 
failure is pertinent to the Taum Sauk case because it is an illustration of the 
mode of failure which can and did happen in the case  due to leakage through a 
concrete face and of parapet wall-face joint into a less than free-draining 
embankment fill.  This is one of the hazards of permi tting a “dirty” rockfill; the 
Taum Sauk fill could have had as much as  45% sand sizes or smaller which of 
course was similar to the percentage of sand in the Gouhou embankment fill. 
 
7.4.2 Effect of Storing Water on Parapet Wall 
 
The effects of storing water against a par apet wall as a “normal” routine loading 
when the embankment is a dumped rockfill  dam are to increase the number of 
potential modes of failure and to in tensify or increase the probability of 
occurrence of other modes of failure which existed prior to the decision to store 
water against a parapet wall founded on the dam crest. 
 
For example, the placement of a 10 ft-high parapet wall on the crest of a dumped 
rockfill dam before settlements are complete most likely will result in differential 
settlements along the wall; and, the downstr eam movements associated with the 
water loading on the dam face and upstream side of the wall will result in opening 
of the joints between the parapet wall p anels.  This opening of the parapet wall 
joints results in additional leakage through the wall joints which would not occur if 
the parapet wall were not used to cont ain operating reserv oir levels.  This 
leakage could decrease the stability of the slope up on penetration into a dirty 
rockfill or it could be the cause of su rface erosion of the downstream slope 
surface. 
 
===PAGE 31===
31 
In the case of overtopping of a 10-ft hi gh parapet wall, the velocity of the water 
impinges on the dam crest with a velocity  of about 25 ft/sec., which is enough to 
accelerate erosion at the t oe of the wall and results in  the water having an initial 
velocity down the downstream slope, whic h enhances the erosion capability of a 
given flow over the top of the wall. 
 
In the most severe case, the overtoppi ng water may erode the rockfill at the toe 
of the wall footing enough that the 60 ft wide parapet wall panel tips over and 
results in an immediate flow thr ough the 60 ft wide opening of about 7,000 
ft
3/sec.  This large discharge is an imm ediately available source of erosive 
energy at the top of the slope; it is a source of erosive energy which would not be 
available if the wall were not used as a storage mechanism. 
 
For the Taum Sauk Upper Reservoir, the probability of over topping the parapet 
wall was high in the case of any instrum ent errors because the shut off elevation 
of 1596 was too close to the low point on th e top of the wall of  1596.99 at Panel 
72. 
 
7.4.3 Foundation of Rockfill Dam 
 
The foundation rock at the Upper Reservoir Dike, being the flattened top of Proffit 
Mountain, is generally fresh to slightly weathered, hard, moderately to abundantly 
jointed rhyolite. Joints are generally stee ply dipping, open, and  some were filled 
with clayey products of weathering such that seepage would occur without proper 
measures to seal the reservoir floor. Du ring construction, the overburden was 
observed to vary from a few feet to as  much as 65 feet thick (MWH, 2003). 
Several significant clay seams, gently di pping, and up to four inches in thickness 
were encountered. Under the dike, the seams were treated either by excavating 
and backfilling with concrete or coveri ng with smaller-sized compacted rockfill. 
The upstream (or inside) 70 feet of the ba se of the dike was specified to be 
prepared such that not more than two-inches  (average) of soil were left in place. 
A filter zone and several layers of compacted rock were placed over questionable 
areas where piping of the foundation mi ght be possible. Outside the 70-foot 
zone, the weathered rock was left in pl ace where its competence was judged 
equivalent to the rockfill. Low areas or depressions in the natural topography 
were filled with compacted rock. Drainag e to the outer slopes was reportedly 
provided for all foundation areas.  
 
During IPOC inspections at the site, a residual soil zone of weathered rhyolite 
could also be observed in the breach ar ea; and one location is shown in Figure 
6-4.  The residual soil was observed to be clayey and it was judged to have an 
effective shear strength almost dictated by  the clay portion of the soil.  Exposed 
rhyolite bedrock is also observed in Figu re 6-4 as well as the remnants of the 
lower face slab and plinth. 
 
===PAGE 32===
32 
A closer view of the exposed rhyolite bedrock and residual soil is shown in Figure 
6-5.  This photo is taken looking east and t he rather flat looking joint surface in 
the rhyolite dips toward the camera in a westerly direction.  This discontinuity 
was observed in the field to dip nearly west at a dip of about 10 o.  This 
discontinuity is described as Fracture Set 8 (FS-8) in the Rizzo Report and is 
reported to have a dip of 8 o and a dip azimuth of 270 o.  As a result of the 
observation of the residual soil, the IPOC requested that  samples of the residual 
soil be taken for direct shear testing. 
 
The shear strengths report ed in the Rizzo Forensic Report ranged from an 
“effective” angle of shearing resistance of 28° to 38°, with a best fit of 33°, when 
the data is interpreted with a cohesion value of 0.  It is possibl e that this zone of 
residual soil of weathered rhyolite was present downstream of the 70 ft. wide 
stripped area and could control the overa ll stability of the embankment, rather 
than the angle of shearing resistance of the rockfill, as the angle of shearing 
resistance is less than the rockfill and the zone of residual soil dips down the hill 
parallel to the original topography.  The low dipping join t surface shown in Figure 
6-5 is important in that it serves to give a foundation discontinuity which daylights 
to the west side of the embankment and gi ves a foundation that in general dips 
downhill at about 8-10
o in the direction of the applie d water forces.  In addition 
some of these joint surfaces appear to have clay coatings. 
 
Considering the downstream  sloping topography of th e embankment foundation 
of residual soil overburden an d the significant clay coated joints within the 
foundation rock that also gently dip to  the west, together with the steep 
embankment slopes, it is understandable that  the stability of the embankment 
may have been marginally st able and vulnerable with the additional conditions 
imposed by overtopping.  The surcharge conditions imposed by the water flowing 
over the parapet wall and over or thr ough the embankment materials may have 
induced higher phreatic surfaces and caus ed sliding along t he base as well as 
facilitated shallow slope movements during the progressive failure of the Upper 
Reservoir embankment.  
 
7.5 Possible Failure Modes 
 
7.5.1 General 
 
The experience that the embankment and parapet wall survived maximum water 
levels between Elev. 1595 and 1596 many times betw een 1963 and 2004 with 
leakage out of the reservoir ranging from  10 to 100 cfs indicates that the dam 
was stable for the conditions present before the liner was installed in 2004.  This 
observation indicates only that the Factor s of Safety of the dam slopes, and the 
Factors of Safety of the wall against overturning and sliding were greater than 1.0 
for various potential sliding surfaces for co nditions prior to 2004.   This does not 
mean that the actual Factors of Safety between 1963 and 2004 would meet 2006 
standards or FERC Guidelines, but that is really only an academic discussion 
===PAGE 33===
33 
anyway because in this report we ar e mainly concerned with the technical 
reasons for breach on December 14, 2005. 
 
After the fall of 2004, the ge omembrane covered the face slab and reservoir face 
of the parapet wall which r educed the total leakage from the Upper Reservoir to 
about 5-10 cfs.  Thus the possible local phreatic surfaces around the wall and its 
footing as well as phreatic surfaces within the dam should have been lower than 
they have ever been and the Factor of Safe ty of all modes of failure should have 
been higher than at any time in the histor y of the project for the 1596 reservoir 
levels without the effects of wall overt opping.  The chronology of events strongly 
suggest that although the construction of  the liner made t he Upper Reservoir 
dam more stable, that the unreliable instrumentation system and the missetting 
of the Warrick Probes made overtopping possi ble.  Moreover field observations 
after the breach indicated that overtopping did occur.  Thus the modes of failure 
discussed below are only those associ ated with overtopping.  The dam is 
assumed to have proved its stability befor e the overtopping event of December 
14, 2005. 
 
7.5.2 Discussion of Specific Modes of Failure 
 
Mode a) The 1.3:1 slopes (37.5°) are very  steep and when overto pping occurs it 
is very easy to get erosion down t he slope surface and a local increase in 
phreatic surface parallel to the slope whic h can result in shallow progressive 
sloughing of the slope possibly from the to e upward until the sloughing begins to 
undermine the parapet wall which leads to  sliding and overturning of the wall 
which then greatly increases the flow as one 60 ft. wide panel overturns or slides 
resulting in a very high flow which great ly accelerates the fa ilure by immediately 
imposing a flow of 7,000 cfs on the slope. 
 
Mode b) As overtopping initiates the pr ocess in a) above and the progressive 
sloughing takes place, the flow of water over the top of the 10 ft. high wall 
impinges at the dam crest at a velo city of 25 ft./sec. and begins locally 
undermining the wall footing in addition to  the sloughing caused by thin layers 
becoming saturated and failing deeper with time.  This shortens the time required 
to reach overturning or sliding of the wall.  In addition to undermining the wall 
footing, this jet of water at 25 ft./sec. impinges on the upper finer rockfill and can 
locally transfer to a 10 ft. pressure head which can change the stability of the wall 
by changing the uplift pressures at the wall toe. 
 
Mode c) It is possible that the local incr ease in the phreatic surface between the 
parapet wall and the upper part of the slope caused by  the impinging jet of water 
can cause a local wedge just beneath the wall to deform and/or reach limiting 
equilibrium without the entire slope below be coming unstable.  This is similar to 
the case considered by means of a FL AC analysis in the FERC Breach Report 
as shown in FERC Report Figure 9.5.  Th is is one possible mechanism which is 
===PAGE 34===
34 
enhanced by the high parapet wall loading in  excess of 10 ft. of water head.  It is 
obvious that this mechanism can occur combined with a) and b) above. 
 
Mode d) Another mode of failure can be deep wedges founded on a base of 
residual soil inclined downhill at about 10°.  The various wedges could have 
steep backslopes as shown in Figures 8- 22, 8-26, and 8-28 of the Rizzo Report 
and can be analyzed for varying phreatic levels on the residual soil base. 
 
7.5.3 Comments 
 
According to the stability analyses conducted by PCR and FERC potential failure 
mode a) is very likely and the progressive  sloughing and erosio n in a) can be 
accelerated, leading to sliding or overturning of the wall, when taking into account 
the local undermining of the wall by the velocity of the water jet impinging on the 
downstream side of the parapet wall footing as described in b) above.  According 
to the PCR calculations the parapet wall  is likely to fail by overturning if 
undermined by 3 ft.  Mechanism c) de scribed above seems possible and was 
indicated by a FLAC analysis conducted by FERC.  The deep wedges of mode of 
failure d) were analyzed by PCR  and required the phreatic surface near the toe 
to build up to about 30 ft. above the base of  the toe of the dam.  This mechanism 
is possible but the time for this deep ph reatic surface to build up 30 ft. is 
somewhat problematic considering that th e “dirty” rockfill will result in a high 
percentage of water runoff rather than deep infiltration. 
 
It is the judgment of the IPOC  that we most likely will not ever know the exact 
sequence of failure at the breach.  It seem s most likely that the failure mode was 
a combination of modes a), b) and c) des cribed above.  The pa rticipation of a 
deeper mode such a d) cannot be exclude d however especially after any wall 
panel overturning results in a huge flow of water. 
 
8. Conclusions 
 
The Upper Reservoir Embankment has had a long history of settlement and high 
leakage increasing to about 60-100 cfs between 1999 and 2003.  Although there 
were many periods of conc ern and repair wa s required tokeep the water within 
the reservoir, the embankment and parapet wall did function for 42 years as the 
containment structure for the Upper Re servoir.  The steep rockfill embankment, 
as discussed in Section 3.1, was possibly marginally stable for the actual “dirty” 
dumped rockfill and the seepage conditions  previously experienced.  After 
installing the geomembrane liner in 2004, it is mo st likely that the Upper 
Reservoir Dam was more stable than it  has ever been under normal loading 
because the total leakage was only 5-10 cf s.  Nevertheless there was no margin 
for accepting the additional pore pressures and erosive effects of overtopping, as 
was the case with the failure on December 14, 2005. 
 
===PAGE 35===
35 
It is the Panel’s opinion that the cause of the December 14, 2005 failure was 
overtopping of the parapet wall and embankment.  The po ssible modes of failure 
for the breach event of this dam and the factors which made this dam especially 
vulnerable and sensitive to overtopping have been discussed in Section 7. 
 
Although this dam and parapet wall comb ined to give an embankment more 
vulnerable and sensitive to overtopping  than most embankment dams it is the 
opinion of this Panel that the primary root  causes of failure on this particular date 
were those factors which caused the ov ertopping to occur.  The secondary root 
causes or contributing fact ors are those factors which combined to make this 
embankment more vulnerable to failure by overtopping. 
 
A summary of primary root causes is gi ven below.  These factors contributed to 
the fact that overtopping occurred. 
 
• The pressure transducers that moni tored reservoir water levels became 
unattached from their supports causing erroneous water level readings.  
After these transducers became loos e from their supports, their 
position heads changed and the reserv oir levels indicated in the 
PLC system gave reservoir levels lower than the actual reservoir 
levels.  The fact that the new system installed in 2004 did not 
consist of a structural support system anchored to the face slab 
enabled this mode of instrument failure  to occur.  As constructed it 
was inferior to all of the water level measuring systems used on the 
Project between 1963 and 2004. 
 
• The emergency backup level probes we re set at an el evation above the 
lowest points along the parapet wall; thus, they fa iled their protection role 
because this enabled overtopping to o ccur before the probes could trigger 
shutdown. 
These probes were a good concept ual second line of defense.  
However, the Hi-Hi Warrick Probe had to be in contact with the 
reservoir water for 60 seconds in or der to trip off the last pumping 
unit.  The Hi-Hi Warrick Probe unfortunately was set at Elev. 1597.7 
at Panel 58 where the top of th e parapet wall was at 1598.0 It did 
not apparently occur to those setting this probe that there were 33 
wall panels with their tops lo wer than the Hi-Hi probe with the 
lowest one (Panel 72) having a top at Elev. 1597.0  Thus the 
emergency backup system was effect ively eliminated by this error 
of setting the Warrick Probe at an elevation which would allow 
considerable overtopping, if the main system would fail. 
 
• The normal operating high water levels of 1 ft. below the top of the parapet 
wall was too near the top of the wall  to allow for any mistakes of mis-
operation. 
===PAGE 36===
36 
This low free board was not rea listic for the system adopted for 
monitoring water levels in 2004.  A more rigorous study of the 
potential errors in the meas urements should have been made 
before adopting this lo w free board which required such a high 
accuracy from this system.  T he adoption of this 1 ft. free board 
was totally inconsistent with having personnel making key design 
and installation decisions who were not even aware of the lowest 
elevation of the parapet wall within the nearest 1 ft. 
 
• Visual monitoring of the Upper Re servoir water levels was almost non-
existent and there wa s no systematic “ground–proofing” recorded of the 
relationship of the top of the wall and associated water levels actually 
being achieved. 
 
• There was no overflow spillway to safely carry accidental over-pumped 
water downstream and below the dam. 
 
The omission of a spillway from the design was a most important 
root cause of this failure.  If a spillway had been constructed with a 
capacity of the two pumping units,  an overtopping failure would not 
have occurred. 
 
A bullet point for a secondary root caus e of the December 14, 2005 breach is 
given below with detailed explanation. 
 
• The marginally stable dumped “dir ty” rockfill embankment and associated 
parapet wall atop the dam, constitu ted an unforgiving containment 
structure.  It could not tolerate the additional pore pres sures and erosive 
effects of the overtopping water plung ing over the top of the parapet wall 
onto the narrow dam crest and cascading down the steep 1.3:1 slope. 
 
The steep dumped rockfill slopes composed of rockfill with as much 
as 20% fines and 45% sand sizes and smaller, make this dam 
especially sensitive to erosion due to overtopping and also 
conducive to increases in pore  pressures during overtopping 
because it is not free draining.  Storing water against a 10 ft. high 
parapet wall founded on the dam cr est is also a feature which 
makes this dam vulnerable to overtopping because the overflowing 
water impinges on the dam crest at a velocity of 25 ft./sec. which 
enhances erosion and makes a lar ge release of erosive energy 
possible, should the erosion at t he downstream footing of the wall 
allow tipping or sliding of the wall. As indicated in previous sections 
of this report there were plenty of  indications, earlier in the history 
of this dam, that there was “dirty” rockfill in portions of this dam and 
much of the repairs as well as co mments in writing were directed to 
the area of the dam that breached between Panels 88 and 99. 
 
===PAGE 37===
37 
Appendix A 
 
IPOC Information Request Letter 
===PAGE 38===
38 
 
Alfred J. Hendron, Jr.     Joseph L. Ehasz           Kermit Paul 
No. 4 College Park Court    11485 Upper Meadow Drive 15 Boies Ct. 
Savoy, IL 61874     Gold River, CA 95670         Pleasant Hill, CA 94523 
  
 
         6 January 2006 
 
 
Mr. Constantine Tjoumas 
Director, Division of Dam Safety and Inspections 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
888 First Street, NE, Room 6N-01 
Washington, D.C. 20426 
 
                                                    Re: Initial Information Request 
     FERC Independent Panel of Consultants (IPOC) 
       Taum Sauk Pumped Storage Project 
    
                      
Dear Mr. Tjoumas: 
 At your request we have agreed to serv e as an Independent Panel of Consultants 
(IPOC) to investigate the breach of the Upper Reservoir of the Taum Sauk Pumped 
Storage Project that occurred the morning of December 14, 2005.  Each panel member 
has visited the site, Hendron on 15 December, 2005, Ehasz and Paul on 29 December 
2005.  Members Ehasz and Paul visited the Osage and Saint Louis Ameren operation 
centers 30 December 2005.  These visits were instructive and required to start our 
investigation. To further the Panel’s investigation, the Panel has assembled the initial 
information request list, enclosed.  If you have any questions regarding any of the 
requested items or tasks please call any of the Panel members. 
      Respectfully Submitted, 
 
                                     
Alfred J. Hendron, Jr.           Joseph L. Ehasz   Kermit Paul 
===PAGE 39===
39 
 
===PAGE 40===
40 
 
===PAGE 41===
41 
 
===PAGE 42===
42 
 
===PAGE 43===
43 
 
===PAGE 44===
44 
 
===PAGE 45===
45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

===PAGE 46===
46 
 
 
Appendix B 
 
Event Chronology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
===PAGE 47===
47 
FERC SECTION 6 EVENT CHRONLOGY 
 
6.1 January 2002 –December 2005  
 
Taum Sauk Upper Reservoir Breach
 
Time Line 
 
Date Event 
January 3, 2002 • Ameren sends plans and specs and design 
calculations for installation of a geomembrane liner 
to D2SI-CRO for review. 
• In letter, Ameren proposes starting construction on 
March 25, 2002.   
March 1, 2002 • D2SI-CRO sends letter stating it has no comments 
on the plans and specs.  The letter asks for an 
erosion control plan and states inspections will be 
performed in conjunction with the Operation 
Inspection and a final inspection near the end of 
construction. 
April 22, 2002 • Ameren informs D2SI-CRO by phone that budget 
of the liner has been exceeded and work has not 
been completed within schedule.  Ameren states the 
geomembrane installation will take place in Fall 
2003. 
• Work completed to date includes installation of the 
toe sill and snap-lock around the interior perimeter, 
patching of critical areas with gunite, and pouring 
concrete in an area that has the most severe leakage. 
November 5, 2002 • Ameren sends letter to D2SI-CRO stating between 
September 26 and October 18 of that year, the upper 
reservoir and penstocks were drained to do 
maintenance work on the units.  During this time an 
inspection of the liner revealed cracks in the floor of 
the tunnel liner about 1500 feet up from the plant.  
Repairs were made at that time.  (What type of 
repairs?)  
March 6, 2003 • Ameren sends letter to D2SI-CRO stating liner 
project is being postponed to start in September 
2004 and be completed by the end of the year. 
April 24, 2003 • D2SI-CRO sends letter to Ameren regarding 
postponement of liner installation.  The letter notes 
leakage is steadily increasing from an average of 30 
===PAGE 48===
48 
cfs during 2000 to about 65 cfs during the first 
quarter of 2003.  Some of the leakage has been 
attributed to leaky seals in the units.  The revised 
schedule is accepted because Ameren is continually 
monitoring leakage and making underwater repairs 
to the concrete liner in the interim.  Also, it is noted 
the pumped storage facility is frequently drained 
and can be drained should the leakage become 
excessive. 
March 15, 2004 • D2SI-CRO sends letter to Ameren requiring a 
Quality Control and Inspection Program be 
submitted at least 60 days before doing liner work 
schedule for September 2004.   
July 23, 2004 • Ameren submits QCIP for liner installation to D2SI-
CRO.  Notes contractor proposes to start work on 
September 13, 2004. 
September 9, 2004 • D2SI-CRO sends letter to Ameren regarding liner 
installation. 
• States D2SI-CRO reviewed again the plans and 
specifications submitted in 2002 and QCIP and have 
no comments. 
• States the work is considered maintenance. 
• Requires monthly construction reports and  
certifications from the design engineer, QCIP 
manager, and licensee that project is constructed in 
accordance with design intent and plans and specs. 
• Notes if plans and specs are revised, the licensee 
must assure that changes are coordinated between 
the engineer, QCIP manager, FERC, and the 
licensee. 
• Notes any changes in operation must be authorized 
by the FERC and properly coordinated between the 
licensee, FERC, and the operators. 
• Requires a Final Construction Report within 45 
days of completing construction. 
September 9, 2004 - 
November 15, 2004 
• Liner installed on upstream slope of upper reservoir.
• All of the upper reservoir level control and 
protection devices were replaced.  Three GE Druck 
1230 transmitters were installed for normal 
shutdown of the pump/generators.  The Low, 
Low/Low Warrick Conductivity switches are 
replaced in kind.  The High, High/High float 
===PAGE 49===
49 
switches were replaced with Warrick Conductivity 
probes.  The upper reservoir PLC was replaced with 
an Allen Bradley PLC.  The pump/generator 
shutdown relays at the plant are replaced with 
Allen-Bradley PLCs.  The level indicators, 
alarming, and data acquisition systems were 
replaced with a WonderWare Operator Interface.  
(source: Joe Raybuck’s Draft Taum Sauk Upper 
Reservoir Level Control and Protection Systems - 
Information Sheet) 
• Instrumentation pipe supports are changed to cable 
support system (source: As-built Design Drawings). 
• Ameren replaced the existing staff gage, which had 
settled approximately one foot along with the 
reservoir wall.  The staff gage had been used to 
measure the normal operating level of the upper 
reservoir, which was 1596 ft.  Due to the settling, 
Ameren believes that the upper reservoir was 
actually operating at 1595 ft. instead of 1596 ft. 
before the liner replacement project.  (Ameren 
Chronology) 
• During the outage new visual level indications were 
painted on the liner reflecting true elevations.  
(Ameren Chronology)  
October 6, 2004 • Geo-Synthetic, Inc. (“GSI”), the installation 
contractor, raised concerns that the March 7, 2003 
gage piping design did not provide for adequate 
anchoring and could compromise the integrity of the 
liner and gage piping.  In response, Emcon/OWT, 
Inc. (“Emcon”), an engineering firm retained to 
design the liner and gage piping, provided a new 
design drawing (8304-X-155099, Rev. 5, dated 
10/5/04) proposing a new gage piping anchoring 
system.  (Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 8).  
October 20-23, 2004 • GSI installed the gage piping.  (Ameren Chronology - 
See Exhibit 9).  During installation, Ameren determined 
that Emcon’s design (8304-X-155099, Rev. 5, dated 
10/5/04) for the gage piping could not be installed as 
shown due to field conditions.  In consultation with 
Emcon and with its approval, Ameren made field 
changes to the anchoring system in order to adapt the 
design to field conditions and to make it more robust. 
• Subsequently, on November 12, 2004, Emcon and 
===PAGE 50===
50 
Ameren performed a walk-through inspection of the 
liner and gage piping installation. 
November 6, 2004 • Ameren field notes reported that the top of panel 72, 
the lowest known point on the upper reservoir 
parapet wall, was measured at elevation 1596.99 ft.  
(Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 10). 
November 8, 2004 • Ameren field notes reflected that the level 
protection probes were intended to be installed at 
the following elevations:  Lo-Lo probe:  1524 ft.; 
Lo probe:  1524.5 ft.; Hi probe:  1596 ft.; Hi-Hi 
probe:  1596.2 ft.  (Ameren Chronology - See 
Exhibit 11.) 
Mid-November 2004 • The level control transducers and level protection probes 
were lowered into the gage pipes.  Wiring from the 
transducers and probes to the upper reservoir gage house 
were marked with colored tape to distinguish one probe 
from another and to provide an elevation reference.  
Ameren believes the colored tape reflects the as-
designed and installed elevations of the level protection 
probes.  These elevations approximate those indicated in 
Ameren field notes.  (Ameren Chronology.) 
November 15, 2004 • Ameren released the upper reservoir for operation.  
(Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 12.)  The normal 
operating level remained at 1596 ft., but now was being 
measured by the new level control transducers and 
visual level indications.  As a result, the actual normal 
operating water level was 1596 ft. and not 1595 ft. as it 
had been prior to the liner replacement project, as 
further described in the September 10 entry. 
November 23, 2004 • Reference comment logged into the Upper 
Reservoir Programmable Logic Controller (“PLC”) 
program indicated that the Hi probe was at elevation 
1596 ft.  (Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 13.) 
• Reference comment logged into the Taum Sauk 
Common PLC program indicated that the Hi-Hi 
probe was at elevation 1596 ft.  (Ameren 
Chronology - See Exhibit 14.) 
• Ameren believes, but has been unable to verify, that 
Tony Zamberlan of Laramore, Douglass, and 
Popham Consulting Engineers (“LDP”), entered the 
comments.  LDP was retained by Ameren to 
provide engineering services related to the new 
level control and protection instrumentation. 
===PAGE 51===
51 
November 30, 2004 • The Hi probe actuated.  An Osage operator recorded a 
trip of unit 2 with the upper reservoir level measuring 
elevation 1595.0 ft.  (Ameren Chronology - See Exhibits 
15 and 16.) 
• Later that day, the Lo Lo probe relay lost DC power and 
shut down both generators.  (Ameren Chronology - See 
Exhibits 15 and 16.) 
• An email from Taum Sauk’s plant superintendent listed 
the shut down setpoints for the upper reservoir.  
(Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 16.)  When the 
average of the three level control transducer readings 
reflects that the upper reservoir level is at the following 
elevations, the corresponding pump shut downs will 
occur: 
 
Elevation 1592 ft.  Normal shut down for first 
pump. 
Elevation 1596 ft.  Normal shut down for second 
or last pump. 
Elevation 1596.5 ft.  All pumps shut down. 
• The superintendent also stated that the setpoint for 
the level protection probes is above elevation 
1596.5 ft. 
December 1, 2004 • To prevent intermittent trips, Tony Zamberlan added a 
one minute time delay to the PLC logic for all level 
protection probe relays.  (Ameren Chronology - See 
Exhibits 17 and 18.) 
• According to Mr. Zamberlan’s Dec. 2nd email, he also 
was at the upper reservoir to “pull up the Hi level 
Warrick probes to 1596.5.”  (Ameren Chronology - See 
Exhibit 17.)  Mr. Zamberlan does not recall, and has 
been unable to explain why he set the probes at 
elevation 1596.5 ft., or how he determined that 
elevation. 
• Reference comment logged into the Upper 
Reservoir PLC program indicated that the Hi probe 
was at elevation 1596.7 ft.  Ameren believes, but 
has been unable to verify, that Mr. Zamberlan 
entered the comment.  (Ameren Chronology - See 
Exhibit 18.) 
December 10, 2004 • LDP finalized and issued the schematic drawing for the 
===PAGE 52===
52 
upper reservoir level relaying and shut down controls 
(8303-P-26648, revision 15).  (Ameren Chronology - 
See Exhibit 19.)  The schematic indicated that the Hi 
probe was at elevation 1596.7 ft. and the Hi-Hi probe 
was at elevation 1596.9 ft.  LDP personnel do not recall, 
and are unable to explain why the drawing reflects the 
stated elevations.   
December 14, 2004 • Pump shutdown levels are indicated in the Taum Sauk 
PLC.  When the average of the three level control 
transducer readings reflects that the upper reservoir level 
is at the following elevations, the corresponding pump 
shut downs will occur: 
 
Elevation 1592 ft.  Normal shut down for first 
pump. 
Elevation 1596 ft.  Normal shut down for second 
or last pump. 
Elevation 1596.2 ft.  Normal all pumps shut 
down.   
Elevation 1596.5 ft.  Non-configurable all 
pumps trip that, if activated, requires a reset.  
 
(Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 20.) 
 
• Reference comment logged into the Taum Sauk 
Common PLC program indicated that the Hi-Hi probe 
was set at elevation 1596.5 ft.  Ameren believes, but has 
been unable to verify, that Mr. Zamberlan entered the 
comment.  (Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 20.) 
December 20, 2004 • Ameren sends to letter to D2SI-CRO in response to 
comments on the 8th Part 12D Report.  As an 
attachment, Ameren includes the latest survey of the 
crest (taken November 2003 and corrected October 
2004) and drawings and diagrams of the new Upper 
Reservoir Level Controls.  The Schematic Diagram 
(revised on 12/10/2004) shows the Hi Warrick 
Probe set at 1596.7 feet and the Hi-Hi Probe set at 
1596.9 feet.  The design drawing of the instrument 
supports shows only three pipes. 
===PAGE 53===
53 
Fall 2004?? • Do we know when epoxy was installed in the 
tunnel crack???  Was this the same time as liner 
work? 
December 27, 2004 • A malfunctioning Lo-Lo probe relay was replaced.  
(Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 21.) 
• The PLC historian software recorded a Hi-Hi probe 
alarm at 3:38 p.m. PST, or 5:38 CST, at an upper 
reservoir level reading of elevation 1586.4 ft.1  (Ameren 
Chronology - See Exhibit 22.)  At the time of the alarm, 
the units were neither pumping nor generating.  (Ameren 
Chronology - See Exhibit 23.) 
• Ameren believes this alarm may have been associated 
with maintenance activities at Taum Sauk. 
January 5, 2005 • Ameren sends letter to D2SI-CRO showing leakage 
rate has significantly decreased since installation of 
liner (from around 50 cfs to around 15 cfs). 
• Indicates diver will seal all remaining leaks in the 
floor area during the Spring or Summer.  
February 12, 2005 • Ameren sends letter to D2SI-CRO including the 
final construction report for the liner replacement.  
The report includes gage piping drawing (8304-X-
155099, Rev. 5, dated 2/7/05) which does not 
identify the field changes made to the gage piping 
anchoring system.  (Ameren Chronology - See 
Exhibit 24.) 
February 14, 2005 • The PLC historian software recorded a six-second Hi-Hi 
probe alarm at 3:57 p.m. CST, at an upper reservoir 
level reading of elevation 1593.5 ft.  (Ameren 
Chronology - See Exhibit 22.)  At the time of the alarm, 
the units were neither pumping nor generating.  (Ameren 
Chronology - See Exhibit 25.) 
• Ameren believes this alarm may have been associated 
with maintenance activities at Taum Sauk. 
February 15, 2005 • The PLC historian software recorded multiple Hi-Hi 
probe alarms between 4:03 p.m. and 5:49 p.m. CST, at 
an upper reservoir level reading of elevation 1593.5 ft.  
(Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 22.)  At the time of 
the alarms, the units were neither pumping nor 
                                                 
1 On the date of the alarm, the PLC Historian software was 
programmed to Pacific time.  In June  2005, the PLC Historian software 
was reprogrammed to Central time.  Throughout this chronology, all noted 
alarms recorded by the PLC Historia n software are expressed in Central 
time. 
===PAGE 54===
54 
generating.  (Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 25.) 
• These alarms were associated with functional checks of 
the Hi-Hi probe alarm that were performed by a 
contractor at the direction of Ameren personnel.  The 
contractors lowered the Hi and Hi-Hi probes into the 
water. 
• The generator trip logic for the Lo and Lo-Lo probes 
was modified from parallel logic to series logic by Tony 
Zamberlan.  (Ameren Chronology - See Exhibits 26 and 
27.)  In series logic, the generators would only shut off 
if both the Lo and Lo-Lo probes actuate.  A similar 
change was made by Mr. Zamberlan to the pump trip 
logic for the Hi and Hi-Hi probes.  Ameren believes the 
generator trip logic for the Lo and Lo-Lo probes was 
modified to prevent spurious actuations.  Ameren has 
been unable to determine why the pump trip logic for 
the Hi and Hi-Hi probes was modified. T. Zamberlan 
stated the changes were made for consistency sake. 
July 20, 2005 • The PLC historian software recorded a one-second Hi-
Hi probe alarm at 5:15 p.m. CDT, at an upper reservoir 
level reading of elevation 1573.8 ft.  (Ameren 
Chronology - See Exhibit 22.)  At the time of the alarm, 
the units were generating.  (Ameren Chronology - See 
Exhibit 28.) 
• Ameren has been unable to determine why this alarm 
was recorded, but around the time of the alarm, a storm, 
likely accompanied by lightning, moved through the 
area of the project works.  The storm may have caused 
momentary induced voltages on the wiring running 
between the Hi-Hi probe relay and the plant PLC input 
card resulting in the PLC Historian recording a false Hi-
Hi probe alarm. 
August 14, 2005 • The PLC historian software recorded a one-second Hi-
Hi probe alarm at 3:50 p.m. CDT, at an upper reservoir 
level reading of elevation 1591.6 ft.  (Ameren 
Chronology - See Exhibit 22.)  At the time of the alarm, 
the units were generating.  (Ameren Chronology - See 
Exhibit 29.) 
• Ameren has been unable to determine why this alarm 
was recorded, but at the time of the alarm, a storm, 
accompanied by lightning, moved through the area of 
the project works.  The storm may have caused 
momentary induced voltages on the wiring running 
between the Hi-Hi probe relay and the plant PLC input 
card resulting in the PLC Historian recording a false Hi-
Hi probe alarm. 
===PAGE 55===
55 
September 25, 2005 • Remnants of Hurricane Rita pass through area. 
• Workers witness overtopping, referred to as 
“Niagara Falls at the Northwest corner of the 
reservoir” 
• Units are immediately put on generate mode to 
lower reservoir. (source: 9/27/2005 email from 
Richard Cooper) 
• Refer to September 24-26 Operations Time Line 
September 27, 2005 • The plant superintendent notes the visual level of 
the reservoir (as measured down from the crest of 
the parapet wall) does not match the average 
transmitter level.  The visual level was about 4 
inches from the top of the parapet wall near “a 
couple of wet areas on the west side of the reservoir 
parapet walls”, even though the transducers were 
showing elevation 1596 feet.  (Note: if the referred 
to west area was around panel 72, which is the 
lowest panel on the west side of the dam – 4 inches 
from the top of the crest would be elevation 1596.66 
feet.) 
• One transmitter is found to be reading “a foot higher 
than the other two” and is eliminated from the 
average, leaving two transmitters.  When the one 
transmitter was taken out of the average, the reading 
was 1596.2 feet.  Since this did not match the 
elevation in the field, a 0.4 (foot) adjustment was 
made to the two remaining transmitter readings, 
making the level read 1996.6 feet. 
• The plant superintendent states they would “check 
on what this does to the actual level the next several 
mornings.”  (source 9/27/2005 email from Richard 
Cooper) 
• At 10:11 a.m., an Osage operator noted in the 
operator log a “high upper resv. alarm [and] small 
gate setting changed to 7.7% by itself.  HPT’s are 
working on something @ Sauk.”  (Ameren 
Chronology - See Exhibit 31.)  At the time the 
notation was made, the units were neither pumping 
nor generating.  Ameren believes this alarm is 
related to work being done on the PLC at 
approximately the same time.  (Ameren Chronology 
- See Exhibit 22.)  Between 10:03 and 10:05 a.m., 
===PAGE 56===
56 
the elevation level readings for the upper reservoir 
were not recorded, suggesting that the PLC was 
offline so that an adjustment to the logic could be 
made.  The adjustment may have resulted in an 
alarm indication once the PLC came back online. 
September 28, 2005 • The PLC historian software recorded a one-second Hi-
Hi probe alarm at 6:18 p.m. CDT, at an upper reservoir 
level reading of elevation 1544.1 ft.  (Ameren 
Chronology - See Exhibit 22.)  At the time of the alarm, 
the units were neither pumping nor generating.  (Ameren 
Chronology - See Exhibit 31.) 
• Ameren has been unable to determine why this alarm 
was recorded, but at the time of the alarm, a storm, 
accompanied by lightning, moved through the area of 
the project works.  The storm may have caused 
momentary induced voltages on the wiring running 
between the Hi-Hi probe relay and the plant PLC input 
card resulting in the PLC Historian recording a false Hi-
Hi probe alarm. 
September 30, 2005 • The Hi and Hi-Hi Warrick Probes are verified to be 
7 inches and 4 inches below the crest of the wall, 
respectively.  (Note: This results in elevations 
1597.417 ft and 1597.667 ft, respectively, based on 
the recent survey of the parapet wall near the 
instrumentation.) (Source: 10/7/2005 email from  
Thomas Pierie and Ameren Chronology.) 
October 3-4, 2005 • A visual inspection of the upper reservoir revealed that 
portions of the gage piping support system had failed, 
allowing the gage piping to move.  The piping was 
observed to be bent.  Ameren operators recognized that 
a bend in the piping would produce an elevation reading 
that is lower than the actual elevation of the upper 
reservoir.  (Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 33.) 
October 6, 2005  • The plant superintendent notes the pvc pipes have 
come loose from the cables and are bowing at least 
5 feet out at about 50 feet down. 
• In the evening, Unit 1 tripped in the generate mode 
due to high vibrations. (Source: 10/7/2005 email 
from Richard Cooper) 
October 7, 2005 • The maximum operating level is set at 1594 feet 
instead of the normal 1596 feet. 
• The set point for the “all pumps” shutdown was 
lowered from elevation 1596.2 ft. to elevation 
1594.2 ft.  (Ameren Chronology) 
===PAGE 57===
57 
• Arrangements are made to have a diver evaluate 
whether the piping could be straightened and 
reattached without draining the reservoir (Ameren 
Chronology – See Exhibit 34). 
• Plans were made to add redundancy to the upper 
reservoir level protection system.  A wind speed 
measurement, transmitter and alarm, were ordered 
for installation at the upper reservoir.  Ameren also 
planned to install an additional probe 2” below the 
normal last pump shut down setpoint (i.e., at 
elevation 1595.83 ft.) so that the level transmitters 
could be checked.  (Ameren Chronology - See 
Exhibit 32.) 
• In the morning, Unit 2 tripped on high vibration in 
the pump mode. 
• The plant superintendent believes some epoxy 
material is coming loose from the tunnel liner that 
was installed last fall.  The epoxy was installed in 
the tunnel to cover cracks in the steel liner.  The 
size of the epoxy patch was about 1 inch thick, 6 
feet wide and 100 feet long.  The tunnel drains were 
found to be flowing at full pipe link they were 
before the epoxy patch was installed.  The vibration 
protection trips on the units were set to normal 
levels and the superintendent believed these would 
protect the units if more material is released. 
(Source: 10/7/2005 email from Richard Cooper)    
October 11, 2005 • A diver visits the site and says the pipes can be 
straightened out but Ameren needs to 
develop/manufacture a new tie down system. 
(Source: 10/11/2005 email from Richard Cooper) 
October 25, 2005 • The preliminary design was completed and materials 
were ordered for the gage piping support retrofit.  
(Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 35.) 
November 2, 2005 • The PLC historian software recorded a nine-second Hi-
Hi probe alarm at 12:49 p.m. CST, at an upper reservoir 
level reading of elevation 1578.4 ft.  See Exhibit 22.  At 
the time of the alarm, the units were neither pumping 
nor generating.  (Ameren Chronology - See Exhibit 36.)  
Ameren has been unable to determine why this alarm 
was recorded. 
November 23, 2005 • All materials are on hand to make repairs. 
• Emails indicate Ameren is having trouble 
===PAGE 58===
58 
scheduling repairs and notes the diver may not be 
available through the end of the year.  (Source: 
11/23/2005 email from Steven Bluemner) 
December 13, 2005 • Operations data shows the transmitter elevations 
drop about 1.9 feet at about 11:20 pm although both 
units are pumping. (Source: Ameren’s Operation 
Data) 
• See December 13-14 Operations Time Line 
December 14, 2005 • Dam Overtops and Breaches 
• See December 13-14 Operations Time Line 
 
 
===PAGE 59===
59 
6.2   Events of September 24- 26, 2005 Overtopping due to the Remnants of 
Hurricane Rita 
September 24-26 Operations Time Line 
Taum Sauk Project, P-2277 
 
Date Time Transmitter
Elev. (ft) 
 
Unit Info. Weather at 
Farmington, MO 
Coincident 
Events 
Sept. 
24 
13:00 1595.82 Generator 1 
on-line 
Wind 8 knots 
coming from 110 
degrees of North, 
Clear 
 
 13:11 1595.03 Generator 2 
on-line 
Same  
 18:01 1544.91 Generator 1 
off-line 
Wind 5 knots 
coming from 100 
degrees of North, 
Clear 
 
 18:02 1544.91 Generator 2 
off-line 
Same  
 18:58 1544.75 Generator 2 
on-line 
Wind 4 knots 
coming from 110 
degrees of North, 
Clear 
 
 19:01 1544.20 Generator 1 
on-line 
Same  
 20:01 1532.00 Generators 1 
& 2 off-line 
Wind 6 knots 
coming from 110 
degrees of North 
 
Sept. 
25 
00:27 1531.65 Pump 2 on-
line 
Wind 3-4 knots 
coming from 30-
120 degrees of 
North  
 
 01:57 1539.80 Pump 1 on-
line 
Wind 5 knots 
coming from 70 
degrees of North 
 
 08:03 1592.11 Pump 2 off-
line 
Wind 9 knots (gust 
to 16 knots) 
coming from 80 
degrees of North, 
precip. 
 
 9:03 1595.96 Pump 1 of f- Wind 14 knots Ameren 
===PAGE 60===
60 
line (gust to 20 knots) 
coming from 80 
degrees of North, 
precip. 
 11:03 1595.97 Generator 2 
on-line 
Wind 8 knots 
coming from 100 
degrees of North, 
precip. 
guards note 
overtopping 
during this 
period. 
 12:15 1590.92 Generator 2 
off-line 
Wind 8-9 knots 
coming from 80-
100 degrees of 
North, precip. 
 
 13:56 1590.85 Generators 1 
& 2 on-line 
Wind 7 knots 
coming from 140 
degrees of North, 
precip. 
 
 18:03 1547.91 Generators 1 
& 2 off-line 
No wind, slight 
precip. 
 
 18:59 1547.78 Generator 1 
on-line 
No wind  
 19:01 1547.68 Generator 2 
on-line 
Same  
 20:35 1528.18 Generator 2 
off-line 
Wind 3 knots 
coming from 310 
degrees of North 
 
 20:59 1525.80 Generator 1 
off-line 
Same  
 21:58 1525.42 Pump 2 on-
line 
Wind 7 knots 
coming from 350 
degrees of North 
 
 23:01 1531.49 Pump 1 on-
line 
Same  
Sept. 
26 
05:53 1591.96 Pump 2 off-
line 
Wind 3 knots 
coming from 300 
degrees of North, 
Clear 
 
 06:43 1594.9 Pump 1 off-
line 
Wind 5 knots 
coming from 260 
degrees of North, 
Clear 
 
* Information for this chart is from Ameren’s operation data & Metar Data 
provided by National Weather Service. 
===PAGE 61===
61 
6.3 Events of December 13 and 14 2005 
 
 
December 13-14 Operations Time Line 
Taum Sauk Project, P-2277 
 
Date Time Transmitter 
Elev. (ft)* 
Unit Info. Weather at 
Farmington, MO
Coincident 
Events 
 
Dec. 
13 
06:05 1591.52 Generator 1 
on-line 
36O , Wind at 5 
knots coming 
from 60 degrees 
from North 
 
 06:06 1591.54 Generator 2 
on-line 
Same  
 7:08 1581.57 Generators 1 
& 2 off-line 
34O, No wind  
 16:43 1581.29 Generator 1 
on-line 
43O , Wind at 3 
knots coming 
from 180 degrees 
from North 
 
 16:50 1580.63 Generator 2 
on-line 
Same  
 20:06 1548.08 Generator 1 
off-line 
45O, Wind at 9 
knots coming 
from 160 degrees 
from North 
 
 20:27 1546.39 Generator 2 
off-line 
45O, Wind at 11 
knots coming 
from 180 degrees 
from North 
 
 22:33 1546.85 Pump 1 on-
line 
43O, Wind at 11 
knots coming 
from 160 degrees 
from North 
 
 23:13 1548.59 Pump 2 on-
line 
41O, Wind at 8 
knots coming 
from 140 degrees 
from North 
At about 23:20 
there is a 1.9 
foot drop in the 
transmitter 
readings, 
although both 
pumps are 
===PAGE 62===
62 
operating. 
Dec. 
14 
04:43 1591.85 Pump 2 off-
line 
39O, Wind at 8 
knots coming 
from 150 degrees 
from North 
 
 05:16 1593.39 Pump 1 off-
line 
39O, Wind at 16 
knots coming 
from 160 degrees 
from North 
 05:20 1581.59   
 05:25 1548.09   
Between 5:15 
and 5:30, 
USGS Gage 
07061270 (East 
Fork Black 
River Near 
Lesterville) 
located near 
Highway N 
was damaged 
by the flood 
surge. 
 05:30 1522.52    
 05:35 1510.78  39 O, Wind at 13 
knots (gust to 19 
knots) coming 
from 170 degrees 
from North 
At 5:38, the 
Osage Operator 
logs that the 
upper reservoir 
indication, 
tailwater level 
indication, and 
generate 
permissives 
were not 
reading normal 
on the LDS and 
STADA 
System 
 05:40 1507.00   At 5:40, Osage 
Operator 
notifies Taum 
Sauk 
Superintendent 
of unusual 
readings. 
At 5:41, the 
Reynolds 
County 911 
dispatcher 
===PAGE 63===
63 
received a call 
about water on 
Highway N. 
 05:45 1505.72    
 05:50 1505.12    
 05:55 1504.77    
 06:00 1504.55  37 O, Wind at 11 
knots (gust to 16 
knots) coming 
from 160 degrees 
from North 
At 6:00, the 
plant 
superintendent 
confirms 
tailrace is 
muddy.  The 
Lesterville Fire 
Deparment and 
Reynolds 
County Sheriff 
contact the 
Plant 
Superintendent 
to confirm the 
upper reservoir 
dam has 
breached.  The 
plant 
superintendent 
begins 
contacting 
others on EAP. 
 08:00 1503.52  36 O, Wind at 8 
knots coming 
from 150 degrees 
from North, slight 
precip. 
 
*  Transmitter readings are not the true elevations of reservoir. 
**  Information for this chart is from Ameren’s operation data, NOAA’s  thrice 
hourly surface climate data for Farmington, MO Airport Station, Ameren’s 12.10 
letter, an interview with Reynolds County Sheriff, and a 1/23/2006 email from 
USGS. 
 
 
 
 
 
===PAGE 64===
64 
 
 
Appendix C 
 
Early Project Correspondence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
===PAGE 65===
65 
 
===PAGE 66===
66 
 
===PAGE 67===
67 
 
===PAGE 68===
68 
 
===PAGE 69===
69 
 
===PAGE 70===
70 
 
===PAGE 71===
71 
 
===PAGE 72===
72 
 
===PAGE 73===
73 
 
===PAGE 74===
74 
 
===PAGE 75===
75 
 
===PAGE 76===

===PAGE 77===

===PAGE 78===

===PAGE 79===

===PAGE 80===
Taum Sauk – Upper Reservoir Full
Figure  1-1
===PAGE 81===
Taum Sauk Upper Reservoir Breached
Figure  1-2
===PAGE 82===
Figure 1-3
===PAGE 83===
Figure 2-1 Cross section from original design drawings
===PAGE 84===
Trends in Type and Height of Rockfill Dams
Figure 3-1
Taum Sauk U. R.
===PAGE 85===
Cabin Creek Upper Reservoir  Embankment
Figure  3-2
===PAGE 86===
Total Settlement History
Upper Reservoir Pin Elevations
Figure 3-3
===PAGE 87===
Figure 3-4
(See Large Drawing S2 Provided)
===PAGE 88===
Figure 3-4A
19
12
===PAGE 89===
Figure 3-5
(See Large Drawing S1 Provided)
===PAGE 90===
Total Leakage (cfs)  vs Time
Figure 3-6
===PAGE 91===
Figure 5-1
===PAGE 92===
Figure 5-2
===PAGE 93===
Figure 5-3
===PAGE 94===
Figure 6-1
Taum Sauk
Upper Reservoir
Breach 12/14/05
===PAGE 95===
Figure 6-2
===PAGE 96===
Penstock transducer
Reservoir transducers
Dec. 14th breach.
Figure 6-3
===PAGE 97===
Figure 6-4
Rockfill Embankment
Residual Soil
Compacted Zone
Dumped Rockfill
===PAGE 98===
Eroded foundation, note rock jointing and overlying clay materials
Figure 6-5
===PAGE 99===
Rockfill between top of rock and base of plinth
Figure 6-6
Bed Rock
RockFill
Original Concrete Slab
Repair  Concrete Slab
Torn Liner
===PAGE 100===
Rockfill between top of rock and base of plinth,
note reddish grout in rockfill beneath the plinth
Figure 6-7
===PAGE 101===
Figure 6-8
Rockfill between top
of rock and base of plinth
===PAGE 102===
Figure 6-9
===PAGE 103===
Pressure Transducers TX2 and TX3
Compared to Reference Transducer
(TX2 reads average of 7.86 feet high
and TX3 reads average of 0.85 feet high)
Figure 7-1
===PAGE 104===
Pressure Transducer Temperature Sensitivity
(TX2 Output Shift Represents +7.11 Ft. of Water Level 
at 5 degrees compared to 20 degrees)
Figure 7-2
===PAGE 105===
Figure 7-3
Note turnbuckle 
unthreaded from lower 
bolt.
===PAGE 106===
Figure 7-4
===PAGE 107===
Note, straightening of protective pipes
between dates of above photos.
Figure 7-5
===PAGE 108===
Upper ends of protective pipes 
with instrument cables in enclosure on parapet.
Pressure transducers use left pipe 
and conductivity probes use the second pipe from  left.
Figure 7-6
===PAGE 109===
Protective pipe base plates are not anchored to reservoir. 
Left guy cable has come loose from base plate in top photo. 
Figure 7-7
===PAGE 110===
Protective pipe support system as found. Note eye bolt 
unthreaded from turnbuckle. Also note lock washer in place at 
connection to U channel but lack of lock washer at turnbuckle.
Figure 7-8
===PAGE 111===
Hurricane Rita Event
Figure 7-9
===PAGE 112===
Hurricane Rita Event
Pump 2 off
Pump 1 off
Figure 7-10
===PAGE 113===
Generation start on day prior to Hurricane Rita.  Note 
smaller level variations compared to next day.
Figure 7-11
===PAGE 114===
Figure 7-12
===PAGE 115===
1525
1530
1535
1540
1545
1550
1555
12/01/2005
21:36:00
12/01/2005
22:04:48
12/01/2005
22:33:36
12/01/2005
23:02:24
12/01/2005
23:31:12
12/02/2005
00:00:00
12/02/2005
00:28:48
12/02/2005
00:57:36
12/02/2005
01:26:24
12/02/2005
01:55:12
12/02/2005
02:24:00
Upper Reservoir Level from Dec. 1st and 2nd.  
1 Pump
2 Pump
No Pump 1 Pump
2 Pump
1 Pump
Figure 7-13
===PAGE 116===
Dec. 2nd.  Note erratic behavior on rising and  lower level 
compared to falling level.
Figure 7-14
===PAGE 117===
Jan. 2005 two pump operation.
Figure 7-15
===PAGE 118===
April 2005 two pump operation.
Figure 7-16
===PAGE 119===
June 2005 two pump operation.
Figure 7-17
===PAGE 120===
July 2005 two pump operation.
Figure 7-18
===PAGE 121===
August 1, 2005 two pump operation.
Figure 7-19
===PAGE 122===
August 10, 2005 two pump operation.
Figure 7-20
===PAGE 123===
August 17, 2005 two pump operation.
Figure 7-21
===PAGE 124===
Sept. 2005 two pump operation.
Figure 7-22
===PAGE 125===
1557
1557.5
1558
1558.5
1559
1559.5
12/10/2005
11:31:12
12/10/2005
12:00:00
12/10/2005
12:28:48
12/10/2005
12:57:36
12/10/2005
13:26:24
12/10/2005
13:55:12
12/10/2005
14:24:00
12/10/2005
14:52:48
12/10/2005
15:21:36
12/10/2005
15:50:24
12/10/2005
16:19:12
12/10/2005
16:48:00
Both units off. 2 Gen
Erratic level indications on Dec. 10th.
Figure 7-23
===PAGE 126===
Pump 1 stop
Pump 2 stop
Level trend without offset-222 MW
Pump 1 start
Pump 2 start
Level indications after pump 2 start shows an offset.
-222 MW = Completion of pump 2 start sequence.
Figure 7-24
===PAGE 127===
Pump 2 off 4:43
Pump 1 off 5:15
4 Ft./Hr. Rate for one pump above Elev. 1592
Water level indications at breach event.
Figure 7-25
===PAGE 128===
Water level indications (left scale) 
and adjusted (right scale) prior to breach event.
Estimated start 
of overtopping at 
panel 72.
1597.1
1597.3
1597.5
Panel 95
Figure 7-26
===PAGE 129===
Upper Reservoir Levels
1540
1550
1560
1570
1580
1590
1600
123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4
December 2005
Daily Maximum Level from Pressure Transducers
Daily maximum indicated levels.
Figure 7-27
===PAGE 130===
Figure 7-28
Hi probe as installed
Hi-Hi probe as installed
Hi probe per PLC comment & DWG
Hi-Hi probe per PLC comment & DWG
Hi probe per field inspections
Hi-Hi probe per field inspections
Estimated level during breach
Upper Reservoir Conductivity Probes
1595.8
1596
1596.2
1596.4
1596.6
1596.8
1597
1597.2
1597.4
1597.6
1597.8
8/1/2004 11/9/2004 2/17/2005 5/28/2005 9/5/2005 12/14/2005 3/24/2006
Elevation
Minimum parapet elevation Panel 72 
Breached parapet Panel 95
Parapet at probes
===PAGE 131===
Figure 7-29
===PAGE 132===
Hi 
Probe
Hi-Hi 
Probe
FERC
Pipe
Bend
Ameren
Pipe
Bend
Estimates of Maximum Reservoir Level Before Breach
1596
1596.5
1597
1597.5
1598
123456
Elevation, Ft.
Indexed 
Pressure 
Transducers
Siemens
Report
Figure 7-30
===PAGE 133===
Note: Due to programming error made on 
Sept. 16, 2005, Unit 2 pump shutdown due 
to level protection probe response was 
disabled.
Figure 7-31
===PAGE 134===
Figure 7-32
